# @mustuse

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1038                                                            |
| Review Count:   | 2                                                               |
| Author:         | Paul Backus (snarwin@gmail.com)                                 |
| Implementation: | <https://github.com/dlang/dmd/pull/13589>                       |
| Status:         | Accepted                                                        |

## Abstract

This DIP proposes a new attribute, `@mustuse`, which can be applied to a
`struct` or `union` type to make ignoring an expression of that type into a
compile-time error. It can be used to implement alternative error-handling
mechanisms for code that cannot use exceptions, including `@nogc` and BetterC
code.

## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Prior Work](#prior-work)
* [Description](#description)
* [Breaking Changes and Deprecations](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations)
* [Reference](#reference)
* [Copyright & License](#copyright--license)
* [Reviews](#reviews)

## Rationale

### Error handling without exceptions

Currently in D, the only generally applicable way for a function to send a
signal to its caller that the caller cannot ignore is to throw an exception.
For a variety of reasons, however, the use of exceptions is not always possible
or desirable. Examples of code that may want or need to avoid exceptions
include:

* code that is written in a language other than D (for example, C or C++);
* code written in D that may be called from another language;
* code that does not want to depend on the D runtime;
* code that cannot afford the run-time performance overhead of exceptions.

Since D is intended to be a systems language suitable for writing low-level,
high-performance code with seamless C and C++ interoperability, its feature set
should support reliable error handling in all of these use-cases.

`@mustuse` helps D achieve this goal by enabling reliable error handling both
for functions that use error codes and for functions that use algebraic
"result" types to signal failure to their callers.

#### Alternatives

One possible alternative to exceptions, [proposed by Vladimir
Panteleev][SuccessType], is for a function to return an error code wrapped in a
`struct` that `assert`s (or `throw`s) in its destructor at run time if it has
not been used (where "using" means calling a method to retrieve the wrapped
value).

While this addresses some of the use-cases above, it has one major shortcoming
compared to `@mustuse`: it reports ignored errors at run time rather than
compile time.

Another alternative is for a function to return error information via an `out`
parameter. Since a call to the function will not compile with a missing
argument, the calling code is forced at compile time to visibly acknowledge the
possibility of an error.

Unfortunately, using `out` parameters for error handling is not a generally
applicable solution because the programmer is not always free to change a
function's argument list to include an `out` parameter. Reasons for this
include:

* the function's argument list is part of an established public API, and
  changing it would break other code;
* the function is used as a callback by another function that requires it to
  accept a specific list of arguments;
* the function is an operator overload.

By contrast, `@mustuse` requires only the freedom to change a function's return
type, and this change can in many cases be made backwards-compatible by using
`alias this` to allow implicit conversion of the new return type to the old
one.

### Functions without specified side effects

Some functions have side effects but are nevertheless unlikely to be called for
those side effects alone. Examples of such functions include:

* functions that acquire resources, such as `malloc` and `mmap`;
* functions that generate random numbers, such as `rand` and `uniform`;
* generic functions that may or may not cause side effects depending on their
  arguments, such as `filter` and `map`.

What these functions have in common is that their side effects, if any, are
considered implementation details, rather than being part of their documented
behavior. As a result, calling code cannot rely on them to cause any *specific*
side effects without risking breakage if and when those implementation details
change.

Though ignoring the return values of these functions is unlikely to result in
disaster, it is still a probable programming mistake which `@mustuse` could
help guard against.

This DIP does not recommend changing the return types of any existing functions
in Phobos or the D runtime to `@mustuse` types, since doing so would constitute
a breaking API change. However, authors of new code would still benefit from
having `@mustuse` in the language and existing projects (including Phobos and
the D runtime) could adopt `@mustuse` on a case-by-case basis if the benefit
were judged to be worth the potential for breakage.

## Prior Work

### In D

The D compiler already warns about discarding the value of an expression if it
has no side effects, including the case where the expression is a call to a
strongly `pure` and `nothrow` function. An attribute that would allow the
programmer to extend this warning by marking specific functions or types as
non-discardable has been proposed several times on the D issue tracker and
forums; see the [Reference](#reference) section below for details.

### In Other Languages

* C++17's [`[[nodiscard]]` attribute][Cpp17Nodiscard].
* Rust's [`#[must_use]` attribute][RustMustUse].
* GCC's [`warn_unused_result` attribute][GccWarnUnusedResult].
* Clang's [`warn_unused_result` attribute][ClangWarnUnusedResult].

[Cpp17Nodiscard]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/attributes/nodiscard
[RustMustUse]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/attributes/diagnostics.html#the-must_use-attribute
[GccWarnUnusedResult]: https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Common-Function-Attributes.html#Common-Function-Attributes
[ClangWarnUnusedResult]: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AttributeReference.html#nodiscard-warn-unused-result

### Cross-Language Comparison Table

|Language      |Attribute           |Applies to         |Diagnostic
|--------------|--------------------|-------------------|----------
|C++17         |`[[nodiscard]]`     |Types and functions|Warning
|Rust          |`#[must_use]`       |Types and functions|Warning
|C (GCC, Clang)|`warn_unused_result`|Functions          |Warning
|D (DIP 1038)  |`@mustUse`          |Types              |Error

## Description

### Formal Specification

`@mustUse` is a compiler-recognized user-defined attribute declared in the D
runtime module `core.attribute`. It takes no arguments.

An expression is considered to be discarded if and only if either of the
following is true:

* it is the top-level *Expression* in an *ExpressionStatement*, or
* it is the *AssignExpression* on the left-hand side of the comma in a
  *CommaExpression*.

It is a compile-time error to discard an expression if all of the following are
true:

* it is not an assignment expression, an increment expression, or a decrement
  expression; and
* its type is a `struct` or `union` type whose declaration is annotated with
  `@mustUse`.

An assignment expression is either a [simple assignment expression][SimpleAssign]
or an [assignment operator expression][OperatorAssign].

[SimpleAssign]: https://dlang.org/spec/expression.html#simple_assignment_expressions
[OperatorAssign]: https://dlang.org/spec/expression.html#assignment_operator_expressions

An increment expression is a *UnaryExpression* or *PostfixExpression* whose
operator is `++`.

A decrement expression is a *UnaryExpression* or *PostfixExpression* whose
operator is `--`.

It is a compile-time error to annotate any function declaration or aggregate
declaration other than a `struct` or `union` declaration with the `@mustUse`
attribute. The purpose of this rule is to reserve such usage for possible
future expansion.

### Diagnostics

An error resulting from `@mustUse` can be suppressed by prepending `cast(void)`
to the offending expression, since `void` is not a `struct` or `union` type
annotated with `@mustUse`. The error message for discarding an expression of a
`@mustUse` type should suggest using `cast(void)` if the programmer intended to
discard the expression.

### Design Goals and Possible Alternatives

The design for `@mustUse` described above was chosen to achieve the best
possible balance among the following goals:

1. **Simplicity of specification.** A language feature that is difficult to
   specify precisely is likely to also be difficult to learn and difficult to
   use correctly.

2. **Simplicity of implementation.** A language feature that has a complex
   implementation is likely to suffer from implementation bugs. A complex
   implementation also increases the burden on compiler maintainers, which
   makes future improvements to both the language and its compilers more
   difficult to achieve.

3. **Rigor.** A language feature that provides strong guarantees that
   programmers can rely on is more useful that one that provides weak
   guarantees or permits exceptions and special cases. Rigorous language
   features compose more easily than non-rigorous ones.

A few possible alternative designs, along with the reasons for their rejection,
are discussed below.

#### `@mustUse` as a function attribute

As described above, `@mustUse` is restricted to use with user-defined `struct`
and `union` types, and cannot easily be applied to functions that return other
kinds of types. One way to address this shortcoming would be to allow
`@mustUse` to be used as a function attribute. For example:

```d
// Hypothetical usage
@mustUse int dontIgnoreMe() { return 42; }

void main()
{
    // error: cannot discard return value of @mustUse function `dontIgnoreMe`
    dontIgnoreMe();
}
```

The main challenge for this design is deciding how to deal with statements that
discard the return value of a `@mustUse` function indirectly. For example:

```d
a ? b : dontIgnoreMe();
(writeln("side effect"), dontIgnoreMe());
(() => dontIgnoreMe())();
```

There are two possibilities:

1. **Error.** This requires all discarded expressions to be searched,
   recursively, for calls to `@mustUse` functions in positions where their
   return values might be discarded.
2. **No error.** This allows return values of `@mustUse` functions to be
   accidentally discarded in some cases, without an explicit cast or type
   conversion.

Option (1) sacrificies specification simplicity and implementation simplicity
to maintain rigor; option (2) sacrifices rigor to maintain simplicity.

Rather than make either sacrifice, this DIP proposes a design that allows both
rigor and simplicity to be maintained, and reserves the possibility for a
future DIP to allow `@mustUse` as a function attribute.

#### `@mustUse` as a class attribute

As described above, `@mustUse` cannot be applied to `class` or `interface`
types. Allowing this usage would make `@mustUse` more widely applicable.

The main challenge for this design is deciding how to deal with `@mustUse`
subclasses. For example:

```d
class Parent {}
// Hypothetical usage
@mustUse class Child : Parent {}

Parent fun() { return new Child(); }

void main()
{
    fun();
}
```

Again, there are two possibilities:

1. **Error.** This requires that if a child class is annotated with `@mustUse`,
   its parent class must also be annotated with `@mustUse`.
2. **No error.** This allows values of `@mustUse` class types to be
   accidentally discarded in some cases, without an explicit cast or type
   conversion.

Because every D class inherits from `Object` and `Object` is not annotated with
`@mustUse`, choosing option (1) would mean restricting `@mustUse` to
`interface` types and non-D `class` types (i.e., `extern(C++)`,
`extern(Objective-C)`, and COM classes). It is uncertain whether such a
restricted version of `@mustUse` would be worth the complexity cost of
specifying and implementing it.

Conversely, option (2) is simpler to specify and implement, but the guarantee
it provides is so weak as to make it nearly useless.

Since both options are unattractive, this DIP chooses neither, but reserves the
possibility for a future DIP to allow `@mustUse` as an attribute for classes
and interfaces.

## Breaking Changes and Deprecations

No breaking changes or deprecations are anticipated.

## Reference

* [Issue 3882 - Unused result of pure functions][Issue3882]
* [Issue 5464 - Attribute to not ignore function result][Issue5464]
* [Issue 20165 - Add standard @nodiscard attribute for functions][Issue20165]
* [xxxInPlace or xxxCopy?][Thread1] (D.General)
* [There is anything like nodiscard attribute in D?][Thread2] (D.Learn)
* [Idiomatic way to express errors without resorting to exceptions][Thread3]
  (D.Learn)
* [Vladimir Panteleev's `Success` type.][SuccessType]

[Issue3882]: https://issues.dlang.org/show_bug.cgi?id=3882
[Issue5464]: https://issues.dlang.org/show_bug.cgi?id=5464
[Issue20165]: https://issues.dlang.org/show_bug.cgi?id=20165
[Thread1]: https://forum.dlang.org/thread/ih7sfi$1q6f$1@digitalmars.com
[Thread2]: https://forum.dlang.org/thread/rzfshzfrxrlbxyvcngke@forum.dlang.org
[Thread3]: https://forum.dlang.org/thread/hhpqmifgjslpzbzfauab@forum.dlang.org
[SuccessType]: https://forum.dlang.org/thread/apphidjekselhhctclgr@forum.dlang.org#post-fttcdxppydmkvusmrdgh:40forum.dlang.org

## Copyright & License
Copyright (c) 2020 - 2022 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Reviews
### Community Review Round 1

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/58b29a85fdf3cbf3521235e40f2a66e141e856c2/DIPs/DIP1038.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/zlanrlqqjjtvfwbymppn@forum.dlang.org)

[Feedback](https://forum.dlang.org/post/qptthjobogooocleizvo@forum.dlang.org)

The following points were raised in the feedback thread:

* How will the cast semantics interact with `@safe`? The DIP author responded that `cast(void)` is always `@safe`.
* `@nodiscard` should not apply to `void` functions. The DIP author agreed but noted that it's not transitive and can never be inferred, so the solution is simply for programmers not to apply it to `void` functions. The equivalent features in C++ and Rust do not make this exception.
* Regarding the "Error handling without exceptions" subsection of the Rationale:
  - It's possible to build a D interface that throws exceptions when binding to other languages
  - The commenter is aware of at least one package marked "optimized for fast execution" that throws
  - The numbers are inaccurate. The DIP author is aware of this, but the effort required for complete accuracy is prohibitive, and he believes the proposal is stronger even with inaccurate numbers than without.
* The DIP doesn't mention constructors. The DIP author replied that the rules cover this implicitly since constructors are functions.
* The DIP should mention if `@nodiscard` applies when the attribute is attached to a type and a constructor is called for that type. The DIP author replied that a call to a type's constructor is an expression of that type and, therefore, when `@nodiscard` is applied to the type, the expression is non-discardable.
* The DIP does not cover template functions with auto-inferred types, the return type of which can be `void` or not depending upon the template arguments. The DIP author replied he could not imagine a need to mark such a function as `@nodiscard`.

### Final Review

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/ab056150975a9a8db5b5da3dbffdd81529802a49/DIPs/DIP1038.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/nfyfsmenjwzhbezffori@forum.dlang.org)

[Feedback](https://forum.dlang.org/post/ipfmxoimroobpzymruzy@forum.dlang.org)

There were only two actionable items of feedback in this round. One was about an ambiguity in the text. The other:

Given a function `@nodiscard int foo` called in, e.g., a ternary operation `a ? b : foo()`, there is no error raised about the return value of `foo` being ignored. The reviewer sees this as a critical shortcoming that should be addressed. The DIP author responded that this behavior is identical to that of GCC, C++17, and Rust. He explained that such error cases could be detected if the annotation were a type qualifier, e.g., `@nodiscard(int) foo`, but that can lead to undesirable errors. He suggested that syntax-level checks could be removed from the proposal if they are deemed inadequate.

### Formal Assessment
The language maintainers accepted this DIP with a request for changes:

* rename `@noDiscard`, as they want to avoid adding addional negative attributes to the language.
* address issues that arise from the feature's interaction with inheritance when applied to classes.
* develop rules for handling covariance and contravariance when applied to functions.

The DIP author addressed these requests by renaming the attribute to `@mustuse` and allowing it only on structs and unions. His rationale for the latter is described in the section, [Design Goals and Possible Alternatives](#design-goals-and-possible-alternatives).

The maintainers approved the author's changes and accepted the revised version of the DIP.
