# Add `throw` as Function Attribute

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1029                                                            |
| Review Count:   | 2                                                               |
| Author:         | Walter Bright walter@digitalmars.com                            |
| Implementation: | https://github.com/dlang/dmd/pull/12934                         |
| Status:         | Accepted                                                        |

## Abstract
Add the `throw` attribute as the inverse of the `nothrow` attribute.

## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Prior Work](#prior-work)
* [Description](#description)
* [Breaking Changes and Deprecations](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations)
* [Reference](#reference)
* [Copyright & License](#copyright--license)
* [Reviews](#reviews)

## Rationale
Currently, functions are by default allowed to throw exceptions. This behavior can be changed
by applying the `nothrow` attribute to a function. But once `nothrow` is used at module scope
or in a block, all functions in its scope are affected; there is no escape.

This is why aggregates do not "inherit" the `nothrow` attribute from the outer scope.
If the entire module needs to be `nothrow`, the attribute must be applied not only at module
scope but inside the definition of each aggregate:

```d
void bar(); // may throw

struct S1 {
    nothrow void foo() { bar(); } // error, bar() throws
}

nothrow {
    struct S2 {
        void foo() { bar(); } // no error, as the nothrow block does not apply
    }
}
```

The problem is that exceptions are not cost-free, even in code that never throws. Exceptions
should therefore be opt-in, not opt-out. Although this DIP does not propose making exceptions
opt-in, the `throw` attribute is a key requirement for it. The attribute also serves
well as documentation that yes, a function indeed can throw.

## Prior Work
The `@safe`, `@trusted`, and `@system` attributes can override each other.

## Description
Add `throw` to [Attribute](https://dlang.org/spec/attribute.html#Attribute).
Add `throw` to [FunctionAttribute](https://dlang.org/spec/function.html#FunctionAttribute).
This produces an ambiguity with the start of a
[ThrowStatement](https://dlang.org/spec/statement.html#throw-statement)
but can be disambiguated by looking ahead to see if an `Expression`follows or a `Declaration`.

The attribute applies only to function and delegate types. For other types, it is ignored.
Its presence in a function declaration indicates that the function may throw an `Exception`.

```d
void bar() throw;

struct S1 {
    nothrow void foo() { bar(); } // error, bar() throws
}

struct S2 {
    void foo() { bar(); } // no error
}
```

`throw` and `nothrow` cannot be combined, but can override one another in an enclosing scope:

```d
void abc() throw throw;   // Error
void bar() throw nothrow; // Error

nothrow:
    void foo() throw; // Ok

throw:
    void def() nothrow; // Ok
```

### Grammar Changes
`throw` is added to `FunctionAttribute:`.

```diff
FunctionAttribute:
+   throw
    nothrow
    pure
    Property
```

`throw` is added to `StorageClass:`.

```diff
StorageClass:
    LinkageAttribute
    AlignAttribute
    deprecated
    enum
    static
    extern
    abstract
    final
    override
    synchronized
    auto
    scope
    const
    immutable
    inout
    shared
    __gshared
    Property
+   throw
    nothrow
    pure
    ref
```

## Breaking Changes and Deprecations
None

## Reference
Herb Sutter notes in
[De-fragmenting C++: Making exceptions more affordable and usable](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=os7cqJ5qlzo)
that half of C++ users either prohibit exceptions wholly or partially in their C++ code.

## Copyright & License
Copyright (c) 2019 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Reviews

### Community Review Round 1

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/8c48c98a0495f73db9a2d5c4aef502b9febe9673/DIPs/DIP1029.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/sbdrybtyfkxfhxxjgqco@forum.dlang.org)

The following specific points were raised in the review thread:
* Use `@throws` and change `nothrow` to `@nothrow`. The DIP author said that `throw` is already a keyword, adding `throws` would be excessive, and `@` is unnecessary.
* Provide a rationale for not using the `@` symbol.
* The DIP could provide some search strategies for differentiating between the `throw` attribute and the `throw` statement.
* What about the inverse of other attributes that do not have one? The DIP author said that since `throw` is already a keyword and it complements `nothrow`, using it as an inverse attribute makes sense.
* If `throw` is a "key requirement" for opt-in exceptions, why not include both in one DIP? The DIP author responded that this proposal makes sense on its own and does not distract from a separate proposal for `nothrow` by default.

### Final Review

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/9db80ddadcf5a220958ddcfec14b9c71cdb43d1c/DIPs/DIP1029.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/lyerouocavjvspqwvrmb@forum.dlang.org)

[Feedback](https://forum.dlang.org/post/qhtqeavhyzjfamhgcjjl@forum.dlang.org)

There were two specific points of feedback in the review thread:
* `throw!bool` would be preferable. The DIP author disagreed, saying that this implies the function is throwing a `bool`.
* `throw` should be added to `StorageClass` to avoid inconsistency with `nothrow`. The DIP author agreed.

### Formal Assessment

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/26e3ce642dc4e615e605ff740f663284fee69472/DIPs/DIP1029.md)

This DIP was accepted with no request for revision.

The Language Maintainers felt that arguments suggesting alternative syntax, such as `@throw` or `throw!bool`, are not persuasive. The motivation behind `@` in attribute names is to provide an alternative to the introduction of new keywords. However, `throw` is already a keyword, and adding `@throw` would introduce an incongruity with `nothrow`. Leaving them both as-is is the simplest approach. `throw!bool` would render `nothrow` redundant and is inconsistent with the existing set of built-in attributes. 

Also, there were no strong objections to the proposal itself. Although some objections were raised to the introduction of a counter to `nothrow` alone as opposed to a broader proposal encompassing all similar attributes, the Language Maintainers see no problem. This DIP is focused solely on the obvious application of the existing `throw` keyword to its new role. Any larger changes to attribute syntax are beyond its scope.