# Shared Atomics

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1024                                                            |
| Review Count:   | 3                                                               |
| Author:         | Walter Bright walter@digitalmars.com                            |
| Implementation: | https://github.com/dlang/dmd/pull/10209                         |
| Status:         | Accepted                                                        |

## Abstract

Reads and writes to data typed as `shared` are not supported by operators
in the core language. They are only accessible via function calls from
the library.

## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Description](#description)
* [Breaking Changes and Deprecations](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations)
* [Reference](#reference)
* [Copyright & License](#copyright--license)
* [Reviews](#reviews)

## Rationale

Making shared types a first class type in D was an effective innovation. The ability
to distinguish between shared and unshared data is critical for developing robust multi-threaded
applications. But D stopped short of altering the semantics of access to shared data,
making the default behavior subject to data races both obvious and hidden as the result of code
motion by optimizing compilers.

By prohibiting direct access to shared data, the user will be required to use `core.atomic`
and to consider the correctness of their code.

## Description

Programmers will now be required to use `core.atomic`, or equivalent functions, to read and write
to shared memory objects. The compiler will report an error when any attempt is made to directly read
or write to a shared memory object. This will prevent unintended, inadvertent non-use of atomic access.

Initialization of shared data is permitted.

There are no syntactical changes.

Examples:

```
shared int x;        // ok, initialization to 0
++x;                 // error, read and write of shared x
shared int* p = &x;  // ok, initialization of shared p
shared int* q = p;   // error, read of shared p
shared(int)* r = &x; // ok
shared(int)* s = r;  // ok
*s = 3;              // error, write to shared *s
int y = *s;          // error, read from shared *s
```

### Limitations

This proposal does not guarantee code will be deadlock-free, nor does it obviate the need
for locks for transaction-race-free behavior. (A transaction is a sequence of operations
that must occur without another thread altering the shared data before the transaction is completed.)

It does not prohibit casting shared data to unshared data, and then operating on it via
the core language operators, although such would only be allowed in `@system` and `@trusted`
code.

### Alternatives

Provide limited support for locked operations with operators where the CPU supports it.
C++ provides such. This is controversial, as some believe it encourages incorrect coding
practices.

## Breaking Changes and Deprecations

All code that accesses shared memory objects will break.
This means there will be a long deprecation cycle.

Code that uses `core.atomic` should continue to work correctly.

Code that is protected by locks will need to 'strip' `shared` off of the head
of the type so that normal code generation can be performed.
This is achieved via `cast()expression` or `cast(const)expression`.
Users will have to be careful not to let any references to those head-unshared memory
locations escape the locked code region, but that was true anyway prior to this change.


## Reference

[1] [Sequential Consistency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sequential_consistency)

[2] [Data race](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Race_condition#Software)

## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2019 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Reviews

### Community Review Round 1

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/0b892dd99aba74b9631572ad3a53000f5975b7c2/DIPs/DIP1024.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/wcoboszbrdgxcsidwndd@forum.dlang.org)

A major, repeated complaint focused on contradictory portions of the text which caused confusion among reviewers.
The DIP author explained this was an error that occurred during editing and that it will be corrected in the next revision.
Aside from a request that the author include references to other languages, the remainder of the discussion was on
related topics (e.g. the current and intended behavior of shared).

### Community Review Round 2

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/0093abce72fa803b9e4067db500171c634daa4a9/DIPs/DIP1024.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/jetqewtibsnrsdpcydph@forum.dlang.org)

Only two items of actionable feedback were provided during this round of review: perhaps examples of the sort of code this change will break could be added; and the sentence beginning "Atomic reads perform an acquire operation..." is irrelevant to the proposal and should probably be removed. The DIP author revised the DIP accordingly.

### Final Review

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/78a5bc098fa00c44f11d1819919eb78b8d263254/DIPs/DIP1024.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/ippdfqxnxbhxwzfdotcm@forum.dlang.org)

A request was made for a reference on the claim that "support for locked operators where the CPU supports it" is controversial. It was rejected by the DIP author on the grounds that it was based on a conversation with Herb Sutter, so there is no source to reference.

A suggestion to include a statement that this proposal "makes shared unusable in betterC code" led to discussion about `shared` and BetterC, which concluded that `shared` can still be used with BetterC.

### Formal Assessment

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/71a7a0d22385b7429ee54d4db6f64958c433f1a8/DIPs/DIP1024.md)

The language maintainers accepted the proposal without comment.
