# Named Arguments

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1030                                                            |
| Review Count:   | 2                                                               |
| Author:         | Walter Bright walter@digitalmars.com                            |
| Implementation: |                                                                 |
| Status:         | Post-Final                                                      |

## Abstract

Allow arguments in function calls to optionally be prefixed with the name of the
function parameter to which they apply, analogous to the manner in which field names
can optionally be used in struct initializers to prefix field initializers. This will
enable better self documentation, make longer argument lists easier to review,
enable reordering of arguments at the user's discretion, and no longer constrain
default parameter values to the end of the parameter list.


## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Prior Work](#prior-work)
* [Description](#description)
* [Breaking Changes and Deprecations](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations)
* [Reference](#reference)
* [Copyright & License](#copyright--license)
* [Reviews](#reviews)

## Rationale

1. Although this proposal supports reordering, the real reason for naming is so one can
have a function with a longish list of parameters, each with a reasonable default,
and users need only supply the arguments that matter for their use case. This
is much more flexible than the current method of putting all the defaults at
the end of the parameter list, and defaulting one means all the rest get defaulted.
2. For a longish list of parameters, when users find themselves counting parameters to ensure they line up, then named parameters
can be most helpful.
3. A step towards making it possible to replace the brace struct initialization syntax with
a function-call-like construct. I.e. the initialization of structs is unified with
struct literals and struct constructors.
4. Allow replacing [`std.typecons.Flag`](https://dlang.org/phobos/std_typecons.html#Flag)
which is syntactically awkward.
5. For situations when code clarity at the caller site is of paramount importance
(i.e. for some critical code), to make it unquestionably clear which values go where,
even for short argument lists.

## Prior Work

* [DIP88](https://wiki.dlang.org/DIP88)
* [DIP1019](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/master/DIPs/other/DIP1019.md)
* [DIP1020](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/master/DIPs/other/DIP1020.md)

Both DIP1019 and DIP1020 detail prior work in other languages, which will not be
repeated here.


## Description

This proposal is based on the recognition that D already has
named parameters for [struct initializers](https://dlang.org/spec/struct.html#static_struct_init).
Closely related are [array initializers](https://dlang.org/spec/arrays.html#static-init-static)
and [associative array literals](https://dlang.org/spec/hash-map.html#static_initialization).

The syntax is modified to replace the definition of `ArgumentList` for function call
arguments with:

```diff
ArgumentList:
-   AssignExpression,
-   AssignExpression,
-   AssignExpression , ArgumentList
+   NamedArgument
+   NamedArgument ,
+   NamedArgument , ArgumentList

+NamedArgument:
+   Identifier : AssignExpression
+   AssignExpression
```

Assignment of arguments to parameters works the same as
[assignments to fields](https://dlang.org/spec/struct.html#static_struct_init).

Matching of `NamedArgument`s to a function's, function pointer's, or delegate's parameters
proceeds in lexical order.
For each `NamedArgument`:

1. If an `Identifier` is present, it matches the `Parameter` with the corresponding
`Identifier`. If it does not match any named `Parameter`, then it is an error.
2. If an `Identifier` is not present, the `Parameter` matched is the one following
the previous matched `Parameter`, or the first `Parameter` if none have yet been matched.
3. Matching a `Parameter` more than once is an error.
4. After the `NamedArgumentList` is exhausted, any unmatched `Parameter`s receive the
corresponding default value specified for that `Parameter`. If there is no default value,
it is an error.
5. If there are more `NamedArgument`s than `Parameter`s, the remainder match the trailing
`...` of variadic parameter lists, and `Identifier`s are not allowed.


The set of matched functions becomes the overload set, to which the usual overload resolution
is applied to select the best match.

I.e., function resolution is done by constructing an argument list separately
for each function before testing it for matching. If the parameter
name(s) do not match, the function does not match. If a parameter has no
corresponding argument, and no default value, then the function does not match.

```d
void snoopy(T t, int i, S s);     // A
void snoopy(S s, int i = 0, T t); // B

S s; T t; int i;
snoopy(t, i, s); // A
snoopy(s, i, t); // B
snoopy(s, t); // error, neither A nor B match
snoopy(t, s); // error, neither A nor B match
snoopy(s:s, t:t, i:i); // error, ambiguous
snoopy(s:s, t:t); // B
snoopy(t:t, s:s); // B
snoopy(t:t, i, s:s); // A
snoopy(s:s, t:t, i); // A
```

The `AssignExpression`s are evaluated in the lexical order they appear in the
`NamedArgumentList`.

### UFCS

There is no semantic difference between `a.foo(b)` and `foo(a, b)` when matching
named parameters to a function declaration. No `Identifier` is possible for the `a` argument
in the `a.foo(b)` form.

### Explicit Template Instantiation

The same is applied to
[Explicit Template Instantiation](https://dlang.org/spec/template.html#explicit_tmp_instantiation).

The `TemplateArgumentList` is replaced with:

```diff
TemplateNamedArgumentList:
-    TemplateArgument
-    TemplateArgument ,
-    TemplateArgument , TemplateArgumentList
+    TemplateNamedArgument
+    TemplateNamedArgument ,
+    TemplateNamedArgument , TemplateNamedArgumentList

+TemplateNamedArgument:
+    Identifier : TemplateArgument
+    TemplateArgument
```

The matching rules are the same as described for functions.

Since template arguments are evaluated at compile time, there is no order of evaluation consideration.

### Named Arguments and API

The parameter names in function declarations will become part of the API for the function,
as changing them would break user code that made use of them. Hence, parameter names must be
selected with care.

Parameter names will not be part of the mangled name of the function. This means that
changing the parameter names will not break the binary API of the function.

Parameter names can be omitted from declarations if no function body is present:

```
int foo(int, double);
```

and the user will not be able to use named parameters when calling such functions.

There is no provision for preventing the caller from using named arguments when the
parameters are named.

## Breaking Changes and Deprecations

None


## Reference

* [DIP1020 Named Parameters](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/c723d8f4e3ac2d5bcaf8cdff87e1507f09669ca6/DIPs/DIP1020.md)
** [Review Round 1](https://digitalmars.com/d/archives/digitalmars/D/DIP_1020--Named_Parameters--Community_Review_Round_1_325299.html)
** [Review Round 2](https://digitalmars.com/d/archives/digitalmars/D/DIP_1020--Named_Parameters--Community_Review_Round_2_330582.html)
* [DIP1019 Named Arguments Lite](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/3bc3469a841b87517a610f696689c8771e74d9e5/DIPs/DIP1019.md)
** [Review Round 1](https://digitalmars.com/d/archives/digitalmars/D/DIP_1019--Named_Arguments_Lite--Community_Review_Round_1_324110.html)
** [Review Round 2](https://digitalmars.com/d/archives/digitalmars/D/DIP_1019--Named_Arguments_Lite--Community_Review_Round_2_327714.html)
** [Final Review](https://digitalmars.com/d/archives/digitalmars/D/DIP_1019--Named_Arguments_Lite--Final_Review_330067.html)
* [DIP88 Named Arguments](https://wiki.dlang.org/DIP88)
** [Review Thread Jan 23 2016](https://digitalmars.com/d/archives/digitalmars/D/DIP_88_Simple_form_of_named_parameters_279191.html)
** [Any News on DIP88?](https://digitalmars.com/d/archives/digitalmars/D/Any_news_on_DIP88_298814.html)

## Copyright & License
Copyright (c) 2019 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Reviews

### Community Review Round 1

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/44b0d4ec0da6a2e797ede748fb1e81cd6db10371/DIPs/DIP1030.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/ngjihdoyluxrikjzcxhk@forum.dlang.org)

[Feedback](https://forum.dlang.org/post/bizqhxszbobynrimsgai@forum.dlang.org)

The following points were raised in the feedback thread:

* What happens with functions without parameter names, e.g., `void foo(int, float)`? Should `foo(__parameter1:0, __parameter2:0.0f)` be accepted? The DIP author replied that since the parameters have no names, any attempt to call the function with names would result in "no match".
* Does UFCS present a conflict, since the first parameter is already matched with the symbol to the left of the `.`? The DIP author replied that there is no semantic difference, e.g., `3.doStuff(6.7, b:"ham")` is an alternative to `doStuff(3, 6.7, b:"ham")`.
* How does the compiler handle function lookup when there is an ambiguous match, but the ambiguous function is in a different module?
* Questions about named arguments' interaction with variadic function and template parameters arose (also in the Discussion Thread). The DIP author said that it is clear that there is no certainty on how they should be resolved, and as such named arguments should simply be disallowed from matching with `...` so that it can be easily enabled if a future solution develops.
* How does the feature work with forward declarations? The DIP author replied that D does not have forward declarations.
* Named arguments make function names part of the API, as changing function names beacomes a potentially breaking change. The DIP author said it's clear from the DIP that a call to `foo(x:3)` will fail to compile if there is no `x`. He also said (in the Discussion Thread) that D already supports using member names in struct initializers, where the same issue can arise, but it has never come up as a problem.
* The DIP should consider making the feature opt-in or opt-out, such as limiting named arguments to only match parameters with default values.

### Final Review

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/7d114c93edb02d8fc4b05f0716bdb6057905fec2/DIPs/DIP1030.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/osiiuzwesgmaegekodif@forum.dlang.org)

[Feedback](https://forum.dlang.org/post/lzpzaoaxzcxeijegfhkz@forum.dlang.org)

Although several pages worth of discussion took place in the Discussion Thread, no feedback was provided in the Feedback Thread.
