# Function Attributes

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1012                                                            |
| Review Count:   | 1 [Most Recent]                                                 |
| Author:         | Nicholas Wilson                                                 |
| Implementation: | [Druntime](https://github.com/dlang/druntime/pull/1881) (preliminary)  |                                                              
| Status:         | Post-Preliminary Review Round 1                                 |

[Most Recent]: https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/95dd8313ba549b4bedf73a7b1dde62890d43da68/DIPs/DIP1012.md


## Abstract

Addresses the desire for different sets of default attributes and rectifies the non-invertibilty
of the built-in attributes by having a "last applied wins rule". Makes keyword-like attributes regular attributes.

### Links

[Forum discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/thread/wnddmlmfinqqfccdlhqc@forum.dlang.org)

## Terminology

Groups of attributes that are mutually exclusive (such as `@safe`, `@system`, `@trusted`), together with binary attributes
(e.g. `pure`, `nothrow`) and their (currently non-existant) logical negations, are called _attribute categories_.

Attributes from `core.attribute` are called core attributes.

## Rationale

Many users feel that the default attributes have the wrong default behavior and, given that attributes are not invertable (the negations do not have names), putting 
```
pure: nothrow: @nogc: @safe:
```
at the top of a file means that one can never "undo" those attributes (except `@safe`/`@system`/`@trusted`).
This DIP proposes a solution to easily change the default values of the attributes by making them regular attributes enabling selected enforcement at varying levels of granularity:
* whole program (`core.attribute.defaultAttributeSet`),
* module scope / remainder of scope (`@attribute:`), 
* declaration block (`@attribute { ... }`) and 
* symbol (`@attribute void foo() { ... }`) 

Regular UDAs are manipulated via `AliasSeq`s, but the compiler recognised attributes are not regular attributes and so they can't be.
This leads to a difference between manipulating the different types of attributes and the need for explicit `__traits` to deal with the compiler attibutes.

Additionally making the compiler recognised attributes regular attributes has a number of advantages:
* manipulation of lists of attributes becomes simpler as traditional methods of `AliasSeq` manipulation can be used
* decouples (from a metaprogramming prespective) the definition of the attributes from their usage eg. to allow listing required core attributes for a method in meta-type definition.
* new ones can be "phased in" by using `@future` without fear of breaking code. Also having the infrastructure in place will make development of new attributes faster.
* it is hoped that this will lower the aversion to adding new attributes

## Description

Move all (DMD) compiler-recognized function attributes into `core.attribute`, making them symbols in their own right. They shall be organized by attribute category into `enum`s, each with the following members:
* `inferred`. Indicates the compiler shall determine the value of the attribute. Function declarations marked `inferred` resolve to the default value. Does not apply where the compiler is not responsible for inference e.g. `final`/`virtual`.
* the attribute's default value e.g. `@system` or impure
* the default value's logical negation e.g `@safe` or pure
* any remaining attributes, e.g. `@trusted`

It is suggested that 
* `inferred` have the value `0`, and the compiler shall be required replace any `enum` core attributes which are set to the value `inferred` with what it determines to be the appropriate non-`0` value, i.e. no symbols in object files (mangling) or in reflection 
shall have a direct core attribute UDA with the value `inferred`. `inferred` may appear in other AliasSeq's such as template arguments.
* the attribute's current default have the value `1`.
* the negation of the default have the value `2`.
* any other values (e.g. `@trusted`) continue from the value `3`.

As all the attributes are now symbols, we can:
* group them in an `AliasSeq`-like fashion to apply them en masse, as is done in LDC for [`@fastmath`](https://github.com/ldc-developers/druntime/blob/ldc/src/ldc/attributes.d#L58)
* mutate the `AliasSeq`s with compile-time computations.

The default value of the core attributes shall be taken from `core.attribute.defaultAttributeSet`.
The values of `core.attribute.defaultAttributeSet` _may_ be determined by version conditions under the control of compiler switches to provide maximum utility and flexibility, like so:

```d
version (D_SafeD)
    alias __defaultSafetyAttribute = FunctionSafety.safe;
else
    alias __defaultSafetyAttribute = FunctionSafety.inferred;

version (D_BetterC)
{
    alias defaultAttributeSet = 
        AliasSeq!(nogc,
                  __defaultSafetyAttribute,
                  nothrow,
                  FunctionPurity.inferred);
}
else
{
    alias defaultAttributeSet = 
        AliasSeq!(FunctionGarbageCollectedness.inferred,
                  __defaultSafetyAttribute,
                  FunctionThrowness.inferred,
                  FunctionPurity.inferred);
}                                     
```

to make all code `@safe` by default by the setting of a compiler flag.

It is also possible for the end user to directly control `core.attribute.defaultAttributeSet` by editing DRuntime directly, 
to create a custom runtime, e.g. `@final @nogc @nothrow` by default for embedded systems.

If multiple attributes from a single category are present, the attribute applied at the innermost scope and lexically last is applied and
all others are removed from the symbols list of UDAs. This is the "last applied wins rule". If a value of `inferred` wins the 
compiler shall replace it with the actual determined value. If the compiler cannot determine the value because it is a declaration,
the attribute category's default value (e.g. gc, impure, system, thows) is chosen.

### Attributes & attribute-like compiler behaviour encompassed in this DIP

Encompassed:

* pure
* @nothrow
* @nogc
* @safe/@system/@trusted

Optionally encompassed:

* `final`/virtual
* Type\_Info / Module Info generation (other components of -betterC?)
* function parameter attributes (`scope`/`return scope`)

Not encompassed:

* `@disable`
* `@property`
* linkage attributes (`extern(foo)`)
* storage class attributes (`const`/`immutable`)
* visibility attributes (`private`/`public`/`export`)
* `align`
* `deprecated`
* `pramga` (e.g. `pragma(inline, true);`)
* `synchronized`

as they 
* do not pertain to functions,
* do not make sense as or do not benefit becoming enums
* require additional information as part of the declataion (e.g. `extern(C++, N.M)`) and are incompatible with enums, or 
* introduce too much breakage changing defaults

### Breaking changes / deprecation process

Use of the current attributes that are not prefixed by an `@`, such as `pure` and `nothrow`, and optionally other modifiers that are attribute-like such as `final`, will be changed to refer to the `core.attribute` symbols, and thus their use without the leading `@` will be deprecated.

During the deprecation phase where `pure` and `nothrow` appear that affect the attributes of a symbol (i.e. their current usage, as opposed to referring to the druntime symbol for e.g. a template parameter) the compiler shall treat `pure` and `nothrow` (without a leading `@`) as though they did have a leading `@`.

No other breaking changes are intended, although the introduction of the new `enum` symbols to be implicitly imported by `object.d` may break some code if the chosen names clash (unlikely) but can be mitigated with `@future` if need be.

### Examples

`module foo;` 

will become implicitly 

```d
module foo;
@core.attribute.defaultAttributeSet:
``` 

Modules with out a module declaration also have `defaultAttributeSet` applied to all symbols.
 
```d
module foo;
// overrides `core.attribute.defaultAttributeSet`'s GarbageCollectedness attribute it is
// applied after defaultAttributeSet and therefore beats it by "last applied wins" rule
@nogc:

// bar overrides the default @nogc'ness above and is @gc
// `gc` is an alias for `core.attribute.GarbageCollectedness.gc`
@gc void bar() {auto a = new int;} 
 
// baz's gc'ness is determined by someOtherFunction
@infer!(nogc) void baz() { someOtherFunction(); }
 
// quux is  @nogc 
void quux();
 
// declarations are conservatively inferred @gc
@infer!(GarbageCollectedness) blarg(); 

// can be used to infer multiple attributes e.g.
// @infer!(nogc,FunctionSafety) void foo() {};
template infer(Attrs...)
{
    static if (Attrs.length == 0) alias infer = AliasSeq!();
    else static if (is(typeof(Attr[0] == cast(typeof(Attrs[0]))0))) // if e is a value of an enum
    {
        alias infer = AliasSeq!(typeof(Attr[0]).inferred,infer!(Attrs[1 .. $]));
    }
    else 
        alias infer = AliasSeq!(Attr[0].inferred,infer!(Attrs[1 .. $]));

}
```

Attributes can be used without attachment to symbols enabling introspection without worrying about compiler attribute inference impacting  the required attributes:

```d
struct RequiredAttrs(T...) if(allSatisfy!(isCoreAttributeValue,T)) 
{
   alias attributes = T;
}

template isRequiredAttrs(T)
{
    enum bool isRequiredAttrs = isInstanceOf!(RequiredAttrs,T);
}

struct RestrictedInputRange(T)
{
    // Note: no leading '@' as the symbols are used directly
    RequiredAttrs!(nothow,nogc):
    
    @property T front();
    void popFront();
    bool empty();
}

auto algorithm(R)(R r) if(Implements!(R,RestrictedInputRange,ElementType!R)
{
   //...
}

// Illustrative: does not take into account UFCS.
template Implements(Model,alias _Idol, Args...)
{
   static if (isTemplate!_Idol)
      alias Idol = _Idol!Args;
   else
      alias Idol = _Idol;
      
   template signaturesMatch(string member)
   {
         alias attrs = Filter!(isRequiredAttrs,__traits(getAttributes, __traits(getMember, Idol,member)))[$];
         enum bool signaturesMatch = isCompatiableWith( __traits(getMember, Model,member),
                                                        __traits(getMember, Idol,member),
                                                        attrs);
   }
   enum bool Implements = staticFold!(templateAnd,
                                      staticMap!(signaturesMatch, __traits(getMembers,Idol)));
}

enum bool isCompatiableWith(_F,_G, Attrs...) = is(typeof({
   alias F = ReturnType!F function(Paramters!F);
   alias G = ReturnType!G function(Paramters!G);
   F f;
   @Attrs G g = f;
});

```

## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2017 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Review

[Preliminary Review Round 1](http://forum.dlang.org/post/rqebssbxgrchphyuruwa@forum.dlang.org)
