# TryElseExpression

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1002                                                            |
| Author:         | [Sophie Kirschner](https://github.com/pineapplemachine)         |
| Implementation: | n/a                                                             |
| Status:         | Rejected                                                        |

## Abstract

In Python and Ruby, the try/catch/finally syntax is augmented with an additional clause,
termed else. In Python, it works like this:

``` python
    try:
        do_something()
    except Exception as e:
        pass # Runs when an error inheriting from Exception was raised
    else:
        pass # Runs when no error was raised
    finally:
        pass # Runs unconditionally, evaluates last
```

### Links

* [Documentation regarding Python's exception handling](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/errors.html#handling-exceptions)
* [Wikipedia example of error handling in Python](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exception_handling_syntax#Python)
* [Wikipedia example of error handling in Ruby](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exception_handling_syntax#Ruby)
* ["The Possibly Forgotten Optional `else` in Python’s `try` Statement"](https://shahriar.svbtle.com/the-possibly-forgotten-optional-else-in-python-try-statement)
* [NG discussion thread #1](http://forum.dlang.org/thread/gruemzcqaupwptfcbefs@forum.dlang.org)

## Description

The new grammar for exception handling would look like this:

``` text
TryStatement:
    try ScopeStatement Catches
    try ScopeStatement Catches FinallyStatement
    try ScopeStatement TryElseStatement
    try ScopeStatement Catches TryElseStatement
    try ScopeStatement Catches TryElseStatement FinallyStatement
    try ScopeStatement FinallyStatement

Catches:
    LastCatch
    Catch
    Catch Catches

LastCatch:
    catch NoScopeNonEmptyStatement

Catch:
    catch ( CatchParameter ) NoScopeNonEmptyStatement

CatchParameter:
    BasicType Identifier

TryElseStatement:
    else NoScopeNonEmptyStatement

FinallyStatement:
    finally NoScopeNonEmptyStatement
```

The _TryElseStatement_ is not evaluated if the try _ScopeStatement_ exits with
a goto, break, continue, return, or exception. It is evaluated only if the
_TryElseStatement_ exits normally.

Exceptions or errors thrown by the _TryElseStatement_ are not caught by any
_CatchStatement_ belonging to the owning _TryStatement_. If the owning
_TryStatement_ has a _FinallyStatement_, then that _FinallyStatement_ is
evaluated after the _TryElseStatement_ and is evaluated regardless
of whether the _TryElseStatement_ results in any exceptions or errors thrown.
The _FinallyStatement_ is always evaluated, whether the try _ScopeStatement_,
any _CatchStatement_, or the _TryElseStatement_ exits with a goto, break,
continue, return, exception, or fall-through.

A _TryElseStatement_ may itself contain its own nested _TryStatements_ for
error handling of operations therein.

### Rationale

Having such a facility built in to D's exception handling will allow the writing
of cleaner, less user-error-prone code.

This is a proven and commonly-used pattern present in Python, a prominent
language, and it can be added to D without breaking any existing code.

As described by [@JackStouffer](https://github.com/JackStouffer):
Here is an example in puesdo-code reduced from a real-world code base.
It's a project that reads values from sensors and then saves them to a server.
As noted, this can currently be achieved without the else clause, but it
makes things clearer.

``` python
try:
    for sensor in sensor_objects:
        get_value()  # this can throw
        if value is not None and value != 'NULL':
            save_value()  # this can throw
except IOError:
    change_notifier_state(bad)
except KeyboardInterrupt:
    change_notifier_state(bad)
    exit()
except (SeverException, ConnectionException) as e:
    # if there's server trouble, wait longer to
    # avoid DDOSing the server
    time.sleep(45)
    change_notifier_state(bad)
else:
    change_notifier_state(good)
    time.sleep(5)
```

### Breaking changes / deprecation process

This addition will affect constructs such as this:

``` D
try
    if (expression)
        try { ... }
        catch (Exception) { ... }
    else { ... }
finally { ... }
```

To retain backwards-compatibility, the above case should continue to be
evaluated in the same way - treating the `else` as a clause related to the
_IfExpression_ and not the _TryExpression_.

In cases such as this one, the compiler should emit a warning notifying the
user that their code has produced an ambiguity, and should state what behavior
the compiler has defaulted to.

An alternative would be to use a keyword which would not cause this or any
similar conflict. However, `else` has become established as meaningful in
the context of exception handling, and choosing a novel keyword may confuse
those who are coming to D from another programming language.

### Examples

#### Abstract example

With the additional exception handling syntax, it would become possible to
write code like this:

``` D
try
{
    do_a_thing();
}
catch(Exception exception)
{
    handle_error();
}
else
{
    depends_on_success_of_thing();
}
finally
{
    do_this_always();
}
```

This _can_ be expressed in D today, but its equivalent is much more verbose:

``` D
bool success = false;
try
{
    do_a_thing();
    success = true;
}
catch(Exception exception)
{
    handle_error();
}
finally
{
    try
    {
        if(success)
        {
            depends_on_success_of_thing();
        }
    }
    finally
    {
        do_this_always();
    }
}
```

Note that a `scope(success)` placed in the `try` statement cannot be used to
accurately reproduce this behavior because exceptions thrown by
`depends_on_success_of_thing` would in that case be caught by `catch` statements
intended to handle errors produced by `do_a_thing`, but not those produced by
`depends_on_success_of_thing`.

#### Code in Phobos that could be rewritten using `else`

The best examples of code that can be more elegantly written using this
`else` clause occur in application logic, such as the example described
above where a values were read from sensors and saved to a server. However,
there are a few places in Phobos that could be more readable and not
require success flags if this new syntax were employed.

Here is a unittest in `phobos/std/range/package.d`:

``` D
unittest
{
    bool ok = true;
    try
    {
        auto r2 = assumeSorted([ 677, 345, 34, 7, 5 ]);
        debug ok = false;
    }
    catch (Throwable)
    {
    }
    assert(ok);
}
```

With this addition to exception handling, it could be rewritten like so:

``` D
unittest
{
    try
    {
        auto r2 = assumeSorted([ 677, 345, 34, 7, 5 ]);
    }
    catch (Throwable)
    {
    }
    else
    {
        debug assert(0);
    }
}
```

Here is a portion of a unittest in `phobos/std/variant.d`:

``` D
// try failing conversions
bool failed = false;
try
{
    auto d = c.get!(int);
}
catch (Exception e)
{
    //writeln(stderr, e.toString);
    failed = true;
}
assert(failed); // :o)
```

It could be rewritten like so:

``` D
// try failing conversions
try
{
    auto d = c.get!(int);
}
catch (Exception e)
{
}
else
{
    assert(0); // :o)
}
```

Here is a utility function defined in a unittest in `phobos/std/xml.d`:

``` D
void assertNot(string s)
{
    bool b = false;
    try { decode(s,DecodeMode.STRICT); }
    catch (DecodeException e) { b = true; }
    assert(b,s);
}
```

It could be rewritten like so:

```
void assertNot(string s)
{
    try { decode(s,DecodeMode.STRICT); }
    catch (DecodeException e) {}
    else { assert(0, s); }
}
```

## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2016 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

### Review

[Preliminary NG discussion](http://forum.dlang.org/thread/gruemzcqaupwptfcbefs@forum.dlang.org)

#### Decision

Disposition: REJECT. A proposal for a similar or identical feature would need
to be include qualitatively new motivation/evidence of usefulness.

#### Rationale

The proposal introduces an "else" clause for try expressions, similar to the
related feature in Python and Ruby. There is no direct correspondent for the
feature in D. A way to emulate the exact behavior is by introducing a Boolean
flag. A variety of similar but not identical behaviors (some of which may
conversely not be directly representable in Python and/or Ruby) can be defined
with the help of "scope" statements.

The main reason for our disposition is the insufficiently argued rationale, as
follows:

* The DIP argues that the feature has proved useful in Python and Ruby.
  Although that is a good starting point, it raises additional questions:

    - For Python and Ruby, an important aspect of the feature is the
      availability of names defined in the "try" clause inside the "else"
      clause. That way the "else" code continues the logic started in the "try"
      clause. The usual D scoping rules (and as proposed in the DIP) disallow
      that. The DIP does not discuss the impact of this distinction on
      idiomatic use of the feature in D.

    - The D language offers other mechanisms for exception flow management in
      the form of the "scope" statement. There is no discussion of how much
      "scope" narrows, if at all, the usefulness of the proposed idiom as
      compared to Python/Ruby.

* A relatively long example given in the rationale is given in scantily
  documented Python. Understanding this Python code (which the forum discussion
  shows has subtleties) should not be a prerequisite for understanding this
  proposal. The example relies on a rich implicit API context, with no
  explanation of exception flow, extant API semantics, and desired behavior.
  The example gives no D equivalent or indeed not even the Python equivalent
  without the use of the "else" feature. We failed to frame the example as
  evidence of the usefulness of the proposed feature for D.

* The example being the main component of the rationale, discounting it makes
  the "Rationale" section incomplete and inadequate.

* The "Breaking changes / deprecation process" introduces an exception in D's
  usual "tightest binding of else" rule for the sake of backward compatibility,
  along with a warning or requiring a different keyword. This section further
  erodes the motivation of the feature, even assuming a strong rationale.

* The "Abstract example" does not mention a simpler equivalent:

  ```D
  {
      scope(exit) do_this_always();
      bool success = false;
      try
      {
          do_a_thing();
          success = true;
      }
      catch(Exception exception)
      {
          handle_error();
      }
      if (success)
      {
          depends_on_success_of_thing();
      }
  }
  ```

Since exact semantics is reproducible the question remains how often the exact
pattern is necessary (e.g. if `handle_error()` never returns, as is often the
case, even simpler equivalents are available; or if `do_a_thing()` sets the state
in an easily identifiable "success" state which would render the additional
Boolean unnecessary). This is indeed apparent in the following section.

* We find the section "Code in Phobos that could be rewritten using else" the
  most promising of the proposal because it gives a real notion of potential
  positive impact on an established codebase.

    - The first example is adequate.

    - The second example can be rewritten as:

    ```D
    // try failing conversions
    try
    {
        auto d = c.get!(int);
        assert(false);
    }
    catch (Exception e)
    {
        //writeln(stderr, e.toString);
    }
    ```

    The assert(false) would not be caught because AssertError is not a descendant of Exception.

    - Similarly, the third example can be rewritten (arguably considerably simpler) as:

    ```D
    void assertNot(string s)
    {
        try { decode(s, DecodeMode.STRICT); assert(false); }
        catch (DecodeException e) { }
    }
    ```

We are left with a scant motivation, awkward backward compatibility tradeoffs,
and scarce examples. Based on this, our assessment is that incremental changes
to this proposal cannot bring it to form. Only an entirely new proposal based
on much stronger insights would make a similar language addition viable.
