# Named Arguments Lite

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1019                                                            |
| Review Count:   | 2                                                               |
| Author:         | Yuxuan Shui (yshuiv7@gmail.com)                                 |
| Implementation: | N/A                                                             |
| Status:         | Post-Final                                                      |

## Abstract

This document proposes an approach to allowing named arguments, i.e., the annotation of function arguments with the corresponding parameter names, in the D programming language. Naming arguments can clarify an argument's intended purpose and improve code readability.

### Reference

Various solutions have been suggested in the D forums at  [1](https://forum.dlang.org/post/khcalesvxwdaqnzaqotb@forum.dlang.org) and [2](https://forum.dlang.org/post/n8024o$dlj$1@digitalmars.com).

Several library solutions have been attempted. See [1](https://forum.dlang.org/post/awjuoemsnmxbfgzhgkgx@forum.dlang.org) and [2](https://github.com/CyberShadow/ae/blob/master/utils/meta/args.d).

Another proposal has been put forth concurrently by
[rikkimax](https://github.com/rikkimax/DIPs/blob/named_args/DIPs/DIP1xxx-RC.md).

There is also an inactive proposal in [DIP88](https://wiki.dlang.org/DIP88).

## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Prior Work](#prior-work)
* [Description](#description)
* [Breaking Changes and Deprecations](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations)
* [Reviews](#reviews)
* [Appendix](#appendix-grammar-changes)

## Rationale
Named arguments can be found as a language feature in several common programming
languages, e.g., Python's [keyword arguments](https://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/controlflow.html#keyword-arguments)),
Lua's [named arguments](https://www.lua.org/pil/5.3.html), and Swift's [argument labels](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/Functions.html).

The motivation of this DIP is primarily to improve readability. The proposal does not address all
possibilities that are opened by the implementation of named arguments as found in other languages.
However, this DIP does not preclude such features from being implemented in a future extension of
the language.

Consider the following example of a function invocation in D:

```d
DecimalNumber product = CalculateProduct(values, 7, false, null);
```

It is difficult to decipher the meaning of each argument. Though some readers may intuit the meaning
of `values` or `7`, there is no way to know at the call site what `false` or `null` refer to.
One must consult the function's documentation.

The `Flag` type in the D standard library can help mitigate some of the problems.
One might rewrite the aforementioned function call like this:

```d
DecimalNumber product = CalculateProduct(values, 7, No.useCache, null);
```

But this still doesn't provide complete information about what the other
arguments do.

This is a real problem for which even Google's C++ coding style guide provides a
solution in the form of [using comments to annotate the arguments]
(https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Function_Argument_Comments),
an approach the DIP author finds insufficient (and which is addressed later in this proposal).

In addition, this proposal has the added benefit of protecting against silent breakage in cases when
a function's parameters are repurposed and renamed. For example:

```d
// Old API: void drawRect(int x, int y, int width, int height);
// New API:
void drawRect(int x0, int y0, int x1, int y1);
```

Here, the old implementation of `drawRect` interprets `x` and `y` as the top left
corner of a rectangle, and `width` and `height` as its dimensions. The new `drawRect` instead
interprets the arguments as the coordinates of the top left and the bottom right corners of the
rectangle. Without named arguments, old code will still compile because the types of the arguments
did not change even though the parameters will be interpreted differently, thereby causing silent
breakage.

## Prior Work

Named parameters and arguments exist as a language feature in several programming
languages.

### Python

All function parameters are named by default in Python. For example, function

```python
def func(a, b):
    pass
```

can be called with

```python
func(1,2)
```

or

```python
func(a=1, b=2)
func(b=2, a=1)
```

They all achieve the same effect.

Named arguments can also be used to skip parameters with default values.

```python
def func(a=1, b=2):
    pass

func(b=3) # same as func(1, 3)
```

Named (keyword) and unnamed (positional) arguments can also be mixed together, as long as
the named arguments follow the positional ones.

```python
func(1, b=2) # valid
func(a=1, 2) # not valid
```

Parameters can also be keyword only, meaning they have to be passed by using
their names.

```python
def func(a, *, b): # b is keyword only
    pass

func(1,2) # not valid
```

Since Python doesn't support function overloading, uses of named arguments naturally have no impact on function overloading resolution.

A recent Python Enhancement Proposal, [PEP 570](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0570/), introduced the ability to make a
parameter positional only.

```python
def func(a, b, /, c): # a, b are positional only, c is named
    pass

func(1, b=1, c=2) # not valid
func(1, 1, 2) # valid
func(1, 1, c=2) # valid
```

The motivations listed in the PEP are worries about exposing parameter names as
part of the public API, and compatibility with the CPython API (which requires
positional-only parameters).

### C#

In C#, the named parameter feature is similar to Python's. Here are some
examples:

```csharp
class NamedExample
{

    static void func(string a, int b, string c)
    {
    }
    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        func("string1", 1, "string2");

        func(b: 1, a: "string1", c: "string2");
        func(c: "string2", a: "string1", b: 1);

        // Like python, named arguments can follow positional arguments
        func("string1", 1, c: "string2")
    }
}
```

However, there are some distinctions. Since C# 7.2, it is possible to mix named
and positional arguments arbitrarily, as long as the arguments are not reordered.

```csharp
func(a: "string1", 1, c: "string2"); // valid
func("string1", b: 1, "string2"); // valid
func(b: 1, "string1", "string2"); // invalid
```

Also, it is not possible to make a parameter positional or named only.

For overload resolution, the overload set is narrowed down by matching the names
first. However, since it is impossible to declare functions with the exact same
set of types in C#, there is no need to keep the parameter names in the function signature.

### Nim

Named parameters in Nim are similar to those in Python. But like C#, Nim
does not support positional-only or keyword-only parameters.

It's also possible to arbitrarily mix positional and named arguments in Nim, but
it's unclear what kind of rules apply. The author was unable to find an
explanation of how the parameters are matched. It appears as if the positional
arguments have to be at the correct index in the argument list.

```nim
proc rect(a: int, b: int, c: int, d: int): int = 0
rect(0, 1, 2, 3)
rect(0, 1, c = 2, 3)
rect(0, 1, d = 3, c = 2)
rect(0, 1, d = 3, 2) # invalid
rect(0, c = 2, b = 1, 3)
rect(0, 3, c = 2, b = 1) # invalid
rect(0, b = 1, 2, d = 3)
rect(0, d = 3, 2, b = 1)
```

It is possible to overload functions purely based on their parameter names in Nim.

```nim
proc func(a: int, b: int): int = 0
proc func(x: int, y: int): int = 1

func(a = 0, b = 0) # returns 0
func(x = 0, y = 0) # returns 1
```

To achieve this, parameter names have to participate in the mangling of function
names in Nim.

### Swift

Swift has a slightly different mechanism of naming function arguments. Each
parameter of a function has label which may be used to label the
arguments. By default, the label is the same as the name of the parameter.

```swift
func fun(a: String, b: String) {
}
fun(a: "string1", b: "string2")

// explicitly specify the labels
func fun2(arg1 a: String, arg2 b: String) {
    // the variable names are still `a` and `b` here
}
fun2(arg1: "string1", arg2: "string2")
// fun2(a:"string1", b: "string2") <- invalid
```

Explicitly specifying the label name makes the argument label mandatory when
calling the function. Using an underscore (\_) as the label prohibits the use of
an argument label for that given parameter.

```swift
func fun(_ a: String) {}

fun(a: "string1") // invalid
```

Swift also disallows the reordering of arguments even when argument labels are
used:

```swift
func fun(a: String, b: String) {
}
fun(a: "string1", b: "string2")
fun(b: "string2", a: "string1") // invalid
```

### Conclusion

The design space of named parameters/arguments is surprisingly large with quite
a few aspects to consider. This DIP attempts to make a minimal set of
the least controversial decisions to reach a useful named argument design
while still permitting future extensions of the D language to make the rest of
the decisions.

## Description

In function calls, allow a function's arguments to be _optionally_ annotated with a label matching the corresponding parameter name, like this:

```d
void drawRect(int x, int y, int width, int height);

drawRect(x: 0, y: 0, width: 1, height: 1);

drawRect(0, 0, width: 1, height: 1); // Also valid
```

When the label and the corresponding parameter name mismatch, the compiler will generate an
error of the following nature: "None of the forward declarations of function
drawRect(int, int, int, int) matches the argument names used to call it." The
relevance of forward declarations will become clear later. The inclusion of the
function prototype is to clarify the function overload chosen by overload resolution.

The compiler can go one step further and guess the intended forward declaration the
user is trying to call, and suggest possible corrections.

### Interaction with other language features

#### Ordering of arguments
Named arguments proposed by this DIP have no effect on the ordering of arguments in function calls.

Doing this prevents this DIP from tapping into one of the important benefits of having named
arguments. However, the ability of specifying arguments in arbitrary order is
not the only benefit of named arguments. And it's still possible, after this
DIP's adoption, to extend the language with the ability of reordering arguments.

This is the decision made by Swift as well.

#### Order of evaluation
Named arguments proposed by this DIP have no effect on the order in which the
arguments are evaluated.

#### Default parameters
Named arguments proposed by this DIP do not allow default parameters to be skipped.

#### Variadic functions
Variadic arguments can be labeled with the name of the variadic parameter and a subscript.

Example:

```d
void vfun(Args...)(int a, Args args);
void vfun2(Args...)(Args args, int a);

vfun(a: 1, args[0]: 1.0, args[1]: 'c');
vfun2!(string, char)(args[0]: "string", args[1]: 'c', a: 1);
```

#### Uniform Function Call Syntax (UFCS)
Named arguments are allowed in functions called via UFCS just as they are for the normal function call syntax.

```d
void fun(int a, int b, int c);

a.fun(b: 1, c: 2); // lowered to vfun(a, b:1, c:2);
```

#### Parameter name omission
If a function is defined with some of its parameter names omitted, arguments to those parameters can be labeled with an empty name.

```d
void fun(int);

fun(:10);
```

#### Member function overrides
Overridden member functions can be called with a set of names matching any of the function
definitions which are visible through the object used to call those functions.

```d
class A {
    int a(int x);
}

class B : A {
    override int a(int z);
}

auto b = new B;
A a = cast(A)b;

b.a(z: 1); // valid
b.a(x: 1); // valid
a.a(x: 1); // valid
a.a(z: 1); // error
```

### Parameter name lock-in
As evidenced by Python's recent introduction of positional-only arguments,
there are some concerns regarding exposing parameter names as part of the public
API. It is perceived that once named arguments are applied in a function invocation, there will be no way to change
function parameter names without causing breakage.

As suggested in the rationale, such breakage can be desired when the function parameters have been
not just renamed, but repurposed. Not all name refactorings correspond with repurposing, so it is
useful to allow for such circumstances when breakage is undesirable.

A survey of name changes in popular libraries done by the authors of a similar
proposal introducing named arguments to C++ suggests this kind of breakage should
be rare. Nonetheless, this DIP supplies a tool to help mitigate breakages
like this.

**Allow calling the same function with a different set of parameter names:** This is achieved through the
use of one or more forward declarations of the function with a different set of parameter names. The caller can use names matching
those in the parameter list of any of the forward declarations. For example:

```d
int add(int c, int d);
int add(int b, int a) { ... }
void main() {
    add(b: 1, a: 1);  // fine
    add(c: 0, d: 10); // fine
    add(x: 1, b: 1);  // error, name mismatch with all candidates
}

```

With this, backward compatibility can be maintained after changing parameter names by keeping the
old prototype around as a forward declaration.

Forward declarations can be annotated with `deprecated` to indicate that a
certain set of parameter names are deprecated.

### Overloading and name mangling
Named arguments have no impact on function overloading. The argument name check is
only performed _after_ function overload resolution.

```d
int add(int a, int b) {...}
int add(int c, int d) {...}
void main() {
    add(a: 1, b: 2); // Error: `example.add` called with argument types `(int, int)` matches both
}
```

The compiler should generate a more useful error message in this case; it should at
least inform the user that named arguments play no role in function overloading.

Named arguments also do not participate in name mangling.

## Alternatives
There are several alternative ways to implement named arguments or a similar feature.
However, they generally add noise to function calls and/or require fundamental changes to the definition of functions.

For example, in one potential library-only solution, it is necessary to call functions like so:

```d
args!(add, a=>1, b=>1);
```

This has too much noise and does not allow for the use of Uniform Function Call Syntax (UFCS).

Also, this solution limits the name of variables that may be used as arguments.

```d
args!(add, a=>a, b=>b); // `a` and `b` refers to the lambda parameter, not variables defined in outer scope
```

Another solution, as employed by the Google style guide, is to use inline comments as argument labels:

```d
add(/* a */ 1, /* b */ 2);
```

Such comments add noise in the form of the opening `/*` and closing `*/`, which arguably
decrease readability. Moreover, this approach does not allow for unordered arguments and the
compiler cannot guarantee that parameters of the same (or implicitly convertible) type are
actually being called in the expected order, e.g. `b, a` as opposed to `a, b`.

## Future changes
This DIP does not prohibit future proposals from adding support for argument reordering,
partially-specified parameter names with reordering, named template parameters,
omission of default arguments by using named arguments,
and other similar features. Nor does it prohibit the inclusion of parameter
names as part of mangled function names.

## Breaking Changes and Deprecations
No breaking changes are expected.

## Grammar Changes
```diff
 ArgumentList:
+    NamedArgument
+NamedArgument:
+    ArgumentName_opt : AssignExpression
+ArgumentName:
+    Identifier Subscript_opt
+Subscript:
+    [ Number ]
```

## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2019 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Reviews

### Community Review Round 1

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/23ef47a94e0fdd5ddc4b2f6b2f4dcfd3c1f43aa6/DIPs/DIP1019.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/luxftbhbrgpzbzvbmrji@forum.dlang.org)

The DIP's requirement for a new function attribute, making named arguments opt-in for both the caller (using named arguments) and the callee (allowing named arguments on a given function) drew criticism: it would be confusing to new users if named arguments work for some functions but not all; it would be a hassle for developers to update old code to support named arguments; adding yet another function attribute is objectionable.

The DIP author insisted that it must be opt-in for the caller to "be robust against name changes" and for the callee because they have to choose if they want the extra responsibility of maintaining parameter names. He ultimately suggested that it should be possible to implement a template in Phobos that can automatically wrap non-`@named` functions to make them `@named`. As an alternative, he suggested relaxing the requirement that only `@named` functions can be called with named arguments: they can be used with non-`@named` functions and produce a warning on mismatch rather than an error.

One reviewer suggested simply allowing named arguments without requiring a new function attribute and allowing optional arguments not to be specified when one wants the default value, saying this would be easier to implement and easier to remove or improve as needed.

One reviewer asked how the example error message could be generated as written, given that the compiler can't know which parameter a named argument is intended to match if reordering is supported.

One reviewer suggested the DIP should provide more details about what sort of breakage the new function attribute would prevent.

One reviewer cited Dart as an example of a language that requires opt-in on the callee side for named arguments: when enabled, the name *must* be used in function calls; mixing optional arguments and named arguments is prohibited.

Some reviewers disliked the provision allowing for argument reordering. There was much discussion about the pros and cons. Eventually, the DIP author decided to remove this from the DIP.

A library solution, [kwargs](https://github.com/atilaneves/kwargs), was suggested, and considerable debate was had about the pros and cons.

One reviewer noted the [Rationale](#rationale) describes two issues that can arise without named arguments, but fails to address how named arguments can prevent them.

It was noted that the DIP mentions UFCS as an argument against a library solution, but does not address how it should work with named arguments. The DIP author said he would address this in the next revision.

Multiple reviewers mentioned that the DIP does not address how named arguments interact with default arguments. The DIP author suggested that a prefix of the parameters could be required, and that given the function `int fun(int a, int b = 1, int c = 2, int d = 3)`, users could specify `a`, `a, b`, `a, b, c`, or all of the parameters in any order. The response to this was that if skipping optional arguments would not be allowed, then argument reordering should be forbidden or left for a future DIP.

One reviewer suggested the DIP should address how named arguments behave with implicit template instantiation. The DIP author felt it should just work, but promised to give the idea consideration when revising the DIP.

One reviewer suggested the feature could be implemented via Tuples.

One reviewer pointed out that if an existing proposal to enhance struct initialization is accepted, then named arguments will be supported implicitly and would be preferably to a new attribute.

One reviewer objected that this is a cosmetic change that adds no meaningful benefit to the language. He noted that most languages that support named arguments are scripting languages where they are useful (such as in a REPL), but in a systems language it's self-documenting to use a struct instead.

### Community Review Round 2

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/e3037dd967b5672e48d0f09b85f082540155d83b/DIPs/DIP1019.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/sbkftyukevoydivapumm@forum.dlang.org)

This version of the DIP dropped the requirement for the `@named` attribute, which made named arguments opt-in on the callee side, after it was criticized in the first review round. This time, the absence of callee opt-in was raised as a criticism on the grounds that it tightly couples function calls using named arguments to the names of the function parameters. This generated significant debate which dominated the review thread.

Some discussion occurred regarding the "lite" nature of this DIP. Some suggested that without allowing for argument reordering or default arguments, it is a useless feature. The DIP author indicated that this proposal is an attempt at a minimal named argument feature which can be built upon with future proposals for e.g. argument reordering and default arguments. Some were concerned that if this proposal is implemented, it may not be possible to build upon and that this could become the "forever" version of named arguments in D.

One of the language maintainers presented what he termed a simpler proposal. The DIP author suggested that proposal could be seen as a superset of this DIP. Another language maintainer listed a number of suggestions to strengthen this proposal.

### Final Review

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/3bc3469a841b87517a610f696689c8771e74d9e5/DIPs/DIP1019.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/gcirbltrwuhntbsvfzst@forum.dlang.org)

The lack of support for argument reordering and argument skipping were repeatedly singled out as major weaknesses in the DIP, with some saying their absence rendered the introduction of named arguments pointless. The DIP author agreed they were necessary, but insisted that this proposal does not prevent them form being added later. The support for named variadic arguments and parameter name omission were criticized as undesirable. Some suggested the DIP should discuss trade-offs of the included features and their alternatives.