# The Deprecation Process

| Field           | Value                                                                           |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1013                                                                            |
| Review Count:   | 3                                                                               |
| Author:         | Jack Stouffer <jack@jackstouffer.com>, Jonathan M Davis jmdavis@jmdavisprog.com |
| Implementation: | N/A                                                                             |
| Status:         | Formal Assessment                                                               |

## Abstract

In order to incrementally improve D or it's standard library, it's often necessary to
mark features or functions for future removal. This document proposes a standardized
process for language maintainers to remove public features. This process would be
used across dmd, druntime, and phobos.

## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Terminology](#terminology)
* [Description](#description)
    * [Public Functions, Types, and Modules](#public-functions-types-and-modules)
    * [Language Features](#language-features)
* [Summary of the Steps in the Normal Deprecation Process](#Summary-of-the-Steps-in-the-Normal-Deprecation-Process)
* [Copyright & License](#copyright--license)
* [Reviews](#reviews)

## Rationale

There is general disagreement on the best and/or accepted way to remove public
features. Each deprecation ends up being handled with slight variations depending on
who's writing the pull request. Standardizing the process makes sure that
deprecations are done very publicly and carefully, so as to minimize breakage and
to provide clear fixes for user code.

## Description

The following lays out the normal procedure for deprecating a part of D. It is
roughly the procedure that has been followed with phobos for several years, but
this formalizes and clarifies it with some minor modifications.

In the normal case, users should be given at least 10 non-patch releases before
a deprecated feature or symbol is removed. This gives users time to update
their code without forcing them to do so ASAP while still not leaving
deprecated features or symbols around long term.

More releases can be given if deemed appropriate. In particular, if a feature
or symbol has been around for a long time and is heavily used, then it may make
sense to leave it around longer. In such cases, the feature or symbol should
probably be undocumented within approximately the normal deprecation period of
10, non-patch releases in order to reduce the likelihood of new code using it.
However, in general, deprecated features and symbols should not be left around
long term (let alone permanently), because it results in a maintenance burden
on the maintainers of any D compilers and the standard library. It also makes
it more likely that the feature or symbol will continue to be used long beyond
the point that it would ideally no longer be used, and in some cases, it can
actively prevent new features or symbols from being added. Ideally, deprecated
features and symbols would be removed from the language or standard library in
a timely manner so that they no longer need to be maintained, and D programmers
no longer need to deal with them in any code bases that they work on. So,
keeping deprecated features or symbols around long term should only be done in
more exceptional cases.

Similarly, if deemed appropriate, a symbol may be undocumented but not
immediately deprecated, but that should only be done in exceptional cases for
the same reason that symbols would ideally not remain deprecated for long
periods of time without being removed. It also has the additional problem that
as long as the symbol isn't actually deprecated, it's unlikely that existing
code will be updated to no longer use it, and if it's undocumented before it's
deprecated, then it will be harder for anyone to know how to update their code.
So, while it may make sense in rare cases, there needs to be a solid reason for
deviating from the normal procedure.

If deemed appropriate, the deprecation process can be shorter than 10
non-patch releases, but under normal circumstances, it shouldn't be, because
removing features or symbols too quickly can introduce a maintenance burden on
anyone using those features or symbols, and it potentially gives D the image of
instability. Two cases where it would make sense for the deprecation period to
be shorter would be

1. If it is determined that leaving the feature or symbol in the language or
   library does sufficient harm that it needs to be removed from use as quickly
   as possible (one example of this would be "accepts-invalid" bug fixes).
2. The existence of the current code precludes its own fix or the fix of an
   equally important issue.

The restriction to at least 10 non-patch releases is made with the asumption
that releases are made frequently enough that this will result in a deprecation
period of about two years (which is the time period that has been used with
phobos for several years now). A change in release scheduling should be
accompanied with a modification of this document to bring the number of
releases in line with a roughly two year cycle.

In the documentation, a symbol or feature should be marked for removal on a
specific release (e.g. 2.091) rather than a specific date (historically, phobos
has used specific dates rather than releases but has been moving to using
releases). Using specific releases is preferable, because it allows users to
easily determine if upgrading will break their code, whereas release dates tend
to only work well when always using the latest release.

At the time of the pull request for deprecation, all code in phobos, druntime,
and dmd should be updated to remove use of the effected code (or be deprecated
if appropriate - e.g. the tests for a deprecated feature would be deprecated
rather than removed). In the case of druntime and phobos, this is currently
enforced by their makefiles. Maintainers of any projects which are tested on
the Project Tester and are broken by the deprecation should be notified.

Both at the time of deprecation and removal, a changelog entry must be made.
This changelog entry should have a short motivation for the deprecation (or
removal) and should describe which steps can be taken by the user to upgrade
their codebase.

In order to facilitate on schedule deprecations, a comment of the format
`@@@DEPRECATED_[version]@@@` should be added to the top of the code to be
removed/disabled where the verison number is the version where the feature will
be fully removed from the language or standard library. This comment allows
code to be easily searched before every release to find all planned
deprecations.

### Public Functions, Variables, Types, and Modules

All removals or changes to protection attributes of public functions,
variables, types, and modules should be accompanied with a deprecation period
so as to avoid immediately breaking existing code.

The symbol(s) should be marked using the `deprecated` keyword with a message
containing the planned release that the symbol will be removed in. A reference
to more information should also be added. E.g. "See the 2.080 changelog for
more details" or "See the function documentation for more details". The
documentation of the symbol(s) should be updated noting the deprecation and
removal plan. The documentation should contain information to help the users of
the symbol(s) transition their code away from the symbol(s).

If the deprecation is occurring because the symbol(s) are being replaced by new
symbols, both the old and the new symbol(s) must be available without a
deprecation message in at least one release to allow users to build their code
without issue on both the `stable` and `master` branches. It has caused
problems in the past when symbols in phobos were immediately deprecated when
their replacements were added precisely because prominent projects such as
dustmite make sure that they work with both the `stable` and `master` branches.

Halfway through the deprecation period (so, normally after the symbol has been
deprecated for five releases), documentation for the symbol should be removed
completely while keeping the code itself public until complete removal in order
to make it less likely that new code will be written that uses the deprecated
symbol.

If there is no equivalent for the functionality of the removed symbol in the
standard library or the runtime, then when the symbol is deprecated, the code
should be added to [undeaD](https://github.com/dlang/undeaD) to allow users to
keep their current code if refactoring is not possible.

### Language Features

Under normal circumstances, the removal of a language feature should be
accompanied with a deprecation period. "Language features" includes bugs in the
current behavior upon which existing code depends, e.g. [Issue
10378](https://issues.dlang.org/show_bug.cgi?id=10378). Fixing such issues
should include a deprecation period for the current behavior and an
introduction of the new behavior as the default only at the end of the period.
If the D leadership determines that a change is critical enough to be
implemented immediately, then of course, it can be implemented immediately, but
in general, breaking changes should involve a deprecation period in order to
avoid causing serious problems for existing D projects or giving the impression
that D is unstable. Whether an "accepts-invalid" bug should include a
deprecation period depends on the nature of the bug and the impact of the
change, but in general, they should be fixed immediately without a deprecation
period.

Deprecations to language features must also update the [language deprecations
page](https://dlang.org/deprecate.html) on dlang.org simultaneously. The
deprecation message given by the compiler should contain the planned removal
period and/or a reference to more information pertaining to the deprecation.

Warnings should not be used in the deprecation process. Warnings are set as
errors in many build systems (including dub), and would therefore prematurely
break many user's code. The exception is when a change deprecates a feature
which is intended to turn something into a warning. In this case, the code
which would trigger the warning must also first go through a deprecation
period.

## Summary of the Steps in the Normal Deprecation Process

### Steps at the time of deprecation

1. Remove all uses of the to-be-deprecated feature/symbol from dmd, druntime,
   and phobos (unless it's in something that is also being deprecated).
2. Update the documentation to indicate in which release the feature/symbol will
   be fully removed as well as give any additional, appropriate information about the
   deprecation (e.g. what should be used instead). In the case of language
   changes, this includes updating the [language deprecations
   page](https://dlang.org/deprecate.html).
3. Create a changelog entry.
4. Deprecate the feature/symbol such that a deprecation message is printed that
   has the release that the feature/symbol will be removed in (and thus will be
   affected by the `-d`, `-dw`, and `-de` flags).

### After 5 non-patch releases (halfway through the deprecation period)

1. In the case of library symbols, their public documentation should be removed.

### After 10 non-patch releases (at the end the deprecation period)

1. In the case of language features, the spec and the [language deprecations page](https://dlang.org/deprecate.html)
   need to be updated for the full removal of the feature.
2. Create a changelog entry.
3. The feature/symbol should be fully removed.

## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2018 - 2019 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Reviews

### Community Review Round 1

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/5327787211d295d2721c46923278104972d33639/DIPs/DIP1013.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/thread/rxlbdijkbhanwvbksuej@forum.dlang.org)

A change was requested in the specification of the deprecation period. The DIP specified the deprecation period as "at least 10 non-patch releases", which, though not mentioned in the DIP, was based on the pace of dmd releases over a two-year period at the time the DIP was authored. It was suggested to change this to "a minimum of two years" to account for future changes to the pace of dmd releases. The DIP author elected to maintain the existing language with the clarification that it is based on a period of two years and that the DIP should be updated with a new two-year release count to reflect any changes in the pace of major dmd releases.

The DIP specified that deprecated symbols must be annotated with a deprecation message "containing the planned removal period". A request was made to clarify that the meaning of "removal period", i.e. the release in which the symbol is removed from the language vs. the release in which it is removed from the documentation. The author agreed to the change.

Separate suggestions to clarify or simplify the steps of the deprecation process were not addressed by the DIP author.

### Final Review

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/1de69e85527aa0e5efea0533c03e8cc732105d02/DIPs/DIP1013.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/hwscnvmtrzfcfnppdioc@forum.dlang.org)

The observation was made that the meaning of `version` in `@@@DEPRECATED_[version]@@@` is ambiguous -- is it intended to be the version of the compiler in which the feature was deprecated or the version in which the feature is supposed to be removed?

There one objection to the recommendation that removal of a deprecated symbol from "any module or package wide list of public functions/booktables/cheatsheets", with the explanation that the deprecation notice itself should be enough to discourage use of the deprecated symbol.

A request was made to explicitly outline and describe each stage of the deprecation process in a list in order to make the document easier to read.

### Feedback from Walter and Andrei

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/commit/6389136159f5bda8df9c21f3c960a58420c0c4b3)

It was requested that the language be less rigid and presented more as guidelines rather than hard and fast rules.

It was requested that the document be more specific about "accepts-invalid" bugs with the note that they should be fixed immediately.

It was requested that the document mention the practice of leaving symbols undocumented long term as some other languages and libraries do.
