# Enum Type Inference

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1044                                                            |
| Review Count:   | 1                                                               |
| Author:         | Aya Partridge (zxinsworld@gmail.com)                            |
| Implementation: |                                                                 |
| Status:         | Post-Community Round 1                                          |

## Abstract
Enum Type Inference (henceforth ETI) is a shortcut to allow the omission of an enum member's
type name when it can be contextually inferred. Its presence in other languages has proven its convenience and popularity.

## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Prior Work](#prior-work)
* [Description](#description)
* [Grammatical Changes](#grammatical-changes)
* [Reference](#reference)
* [Copyright & License](#copyright--license)
* [Reviews](#reviews)

## Rationale
Writing the same enum type names over and over again can be tedious. The solution offered by several other modern languages is simple: permit the omission
of an enum member's type name when it can be inferred from its context.
Having this shortcut in D would be equally beneficial, with few drawbacks.

## Prior Work
Implementation of this feature in other languages:
- [Swift](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/Enumerations.html)
- [Ziglang](https://ziglang.org/documentation/master/#Enum-Literals)
- [Odin](https://odin-lang.org/docs/overview/#implicit-selector-expression)

Java allows omitting the enum type in switch-case statements: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/enum.html

A suggestion for a similar feature in Rust but with a different approach: https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/enum-path-inference-with-variant-syntax/16851

## Description
This DIP proposes that ETI in D should use the syntax `$enumMember`. This syntax was chosen because the dot operator without an enum name as used in other languages (`.enumMember`) would have the same syntax as D's [module scope operator](https://dlang.org/spec/module.html#module_scope_operators). Suggestions for an alternative syntax may be raised,
but the proposed syntax should already represent the best compromise between convenience and compatibility.

In principle, ETI should be allowed anywhere that an enum type is known unambiguously at compile-time.
The following is a (non-exhaustive) list of circumstances in which ETI will be permitted.

### 1. Initializers and assignments
ETI is allowed when initializing or assigning to a variable that has a known enum type.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d }

struct S{ A one, two; }

void main(){
    A    myA1 = $b;      // myA1 = A.b
    A    myA2 = $b | $c; // myA2 = A.c
    auto myA3 = $b;      // error, we don't know the type of "$b"!

    S myS;
    myS.one = $c; // myB.one = A.c
    myS.two = $d; // myB.two = A.d
}
```

### 2. Return statements
ETI is allowed in return statements when a function has an explicit enum return type.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d }

A myFn(){
    return $c; //returns A.c
}

auto myBrokenFn(){
    return $c; // error, we don't know the type of "$c"!
}
```

### 3. Argument lists
ETI is allowed in the argument lists of function calls and template instantiations when they can bind to explicitly typed enum parameters.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d }

struct S{ A one, two; }

void myFn(A param){}
void myDefaultFn(A param=$d){}
void myTempFn(T)(T param){}

void main(){
    S    myS1 = {one:$a, two:$b};
    auto myS2 = S($a, $b);

    myFn($a);
    myFn($a + $a); // passes A.b

    myDefaultFn();
    myDefaultFn($c);

    myTempFn!A($a);
    myTempFn($a); // error, can't infer a type to instantiate the template with from "$a"
}
```

### 4. Case statements
ETI is allowed in the case statements of a switch.
```d
import std.stdio: writeln;

enum WordLetterOfTheDay{ a,b,c,d/*...*/ }

void main(){
    auto letterToday = WordLetterOfTheDay.b;

    import std.stdio;
    switch(letterToday){
        case $a:
            writeln("Apple");
            break;
        case $b:
            writeln("Bicycle");
            break;
        case $c:
            writeln("Caterpillar");
            break;
        case $d:
            writeln("Didgeridoo");
            break;
        /*...*/
    }
}
```

### 5. Array literals
A) ETI is allowed in array literals in initializations and assignments as determined by item 1 (Initializations and assignments) above.

B) ETI is also allowed in array literals for which an explicit enum type can be inferred.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d }

// (A)
A[4] x = [$a, $b, $c, $d];
// (B)
auto y = [A.a, $b, $c, $d]; // typeof(y) = A[]
auto z = [A.c, 64, $b, $b]; // typeof(z) = int[]
```

### Other considerations
When the resolution of ETI is ambiguous due to multiple candidate enums, ETI is prohibited.
```d
enum A{ a,b,c,d,e }
enum B{ a,b,c,d }

void myFn(A param){}
void myFn(B param){}

void main(){
    myFn(A.a);
    myFn($a); // error, we have two equally valid candidates!
    myFn($e); // OK, the only candidate is "myFn(A.e)", since B does not have "$e"
}
```

### ETI vs the `with` statement
For some use cases, an argument could be made against the need for ETI. For instance, the `final switch` statements combined with the `with` statement:
```d
enum A{ a, b, c }

void main(){
    auto myA = A.b;
    final switch(myA) with(typeof(myA)){
        case a:
            // ...
            break;
        case b:
            // ...
            break;
        case c:
            // ...
            break;
    }
}
```
In the above case, ETI is not necessary.

However, there are many everyday cases where using the `with` statement would prove insufficient.
For example, given the following declarations:
```d
enum Size{ small, medium, large }
enum Shape{ square, round, triangular }
enum State{ on, off, undefined }

struct Obj{
    Size  size;
    Shape shape;
    State state;

    void myFn(Size size, Shape shape, State state){};
}
```
Let's create a `main` that doesn't use ETI or `with` statements:
```d
void main(){
    Obj myObj = {
        size:  Size.large,
        shape: Shape.round,
        state: State.on,
    };
    myObj.myFn(Size.medium, Shape.square, State.undefined);
}
```
Next, here's a version using ETI:
```d
void main(){
    Obj myObj = {
        size:  $large,
        shape: $round,
        state: $on,
    };
    myObj.myFn($medium, $square, $undefined);
}
```
And finally, here's a version rewritten to use `with`:
```d
void main(){
    Obj myObj;
    with(myObj) with(Size) with(Shape) with(State){
        size  = large;
        shape = round;
        state = on;

        myFn(medium, square, undefined);
    }
}
```
The version using ETI is shorter than the version without it and loses no readability.
The same can't be said for the `with` version, which produces a less readable result.

## Grammatical Changes
```diff
PrimaryExpression:
+   $ Identifier
```

## Reference
- [DIPX: Enum Literals / Implicit Selector Expression](https://forum.dlang.org/thread/yxxhemcpfkdwewvzulxf@forum.dlang.org)
- [Enum literals, good? bad? what do you think?](https://forum.dlang.org/thread/zvhelliyehokebybmttz@forum.dlang.org)
- [Implementing Parent Enum Inference in the language (.MyValue instead of MyEnum.MyValue) #88](https://github.com/dlang/projects/issues/88)

## Copyright & License
Copyright © 2022 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Reviews
### Community Review Round 1
[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/2e6d428f42b879c0220ae6adb675164e3ce3803c/DIPs/DIP1042.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/clkvzkxobrcqcelzwnej@forum.dlang.org)

[Feedback](https://forum.dlang.org/post/kondhvmuactgsorbllka@forum.dlang.org)

The following items of actionable feedback were provided in the Feedback Thread.

* The second paragraph of 'Description' is too vague. A DIP's description should be complete and unambiguous. The DIP author suggested it could be revised with help from some experienced implementers.
* The DIP does not address what happens in combination with function and template overloading. The DIP author said this is addressed in 'Other considerations'.
* The DIP does not address what happens in the case of `auto x = e` when a variable `int e` and `enum E {e}` are in module scope. The DIP author noted the example should be `auto x = $e`, which would always resolve to `E.e`.
* The DIP does not address scoping rules, e.g., what happens in `auto x = e` when local variable `int e` shadows `enum E {e}` in module scope. The DIP author noted the example should be `auto x = $e`, which would always resolve to `E.e`.
* The C-style of enums should be mentioned in 'Prior Work'. The DIP author disagrees, as C-style emums have different behavior.
* A special syntax for declaring enums that use ETI, e.g., `enum NewKeywordHere { ex = 1 }` would be less disruptive than adding `$` and new lookup rules. The DIP author disagreed, arguing this might cause old code to break, would make it more difficult to distinguish between enums with inferred types and variables with the same names, and would cause confusing name conflicts.
* The `$e` syntax will require a search of every enum in scope, which can be slow. A separate symbol table will likely need to be maintained. The DIP author described an approach to resolution and asked if it was feasible.
* The rule about array inference is unclear. Is the rule set by the type of the first element? Now, the type of an array literal is determined by the common type of all elements, not the first element. The author responded that the initial draft specified the first element, but the DIP manager suggested removing it because "D already infers the type of array literals when it can", then asked if the first element rule be added in again.
* What about nested arrays? The DIP author says the behavior should be consistent with existing behavior.
* Consider an alternative to the acronym "ETI", which in C++ means "explicit template instantiation". The DIP author responded by saying that D is not C++, but suggested that the feature should go into the spec as "type inference".
* Using new symbols for a minor feature is wasteful. "implicit with" would be a more elegant approach. The DIP author said that it's a minor feature now, but could be more generalized later. She also suggested if "implicit with" is only used in case statements, that defeats the purpose of this proposal.
* The 'Rationale' section is mostly empty, expressing a personal opinion that qualifying enums "can be tedious". It should be expanded to clarify the problem the DIP intends to solve. The DIP author agreed and commited to expanding that section.
