# DoExpression

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1001                                                            |
| Review Count:   | 1 [Most Recent]                                                 |
| Author:         | [Cauterite](https://github.com/Cauterite)                       |
| Implementation: | https://github.com/dlang/dmd/compare/master...Cauterite:doExpr0 |
| Status:         | Rejected                                                        |

[Most Recent]: https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/tree/16f0f0f5915483c55bf38a6844a8717308923a70/DIPs/DIP1001.md

## Abstract

A *DoExpression* `do(x,y,z)` is exactly equivalent to a *CommaExpression* `(x,y,z)`, but
doesn't emit a deprecation warning.

### Links

[Updated grammar spec](https://github.com/dlang/dlang.org/compare/master...Cauterite:patch-1)

[Deprecation of CommaExpression](https://dlang.org/deprecate.html#Using%20the%20result%20of%20a%20comma%20expression)

## Description

Using the result of a comma expression is scheduled for deprecation, so it would be
nice to have new syntax which replaces it. *DoExpression* is a new *PrimaryExpression*
which serves the purpose of *CommaExpression* with a more explicit syntax, avoiding
the problems which lead to *CommaExpression*'s deprecation.

### Rationale

- Sometimes you still need to use a comma expression. We don't live in a perfect world where every function is pure,
but we can live in a world where you don't need to split your expression into statements because of side-effects.
- The `do` keyword is currently wasted on a single rarely-used statement type ('do-while' statements).
Sure, you could implement this syntax with a variadic template function,
but why waste this opportunity to recycle `do`, when it's the perfect keyword for this purpose?
- Implementation is dead-simple (already finished).

### Breaking changes / deprecation process

The only existing syntax it collides with is a *CommaExpression* inside a *do-while* statement with no braces:
```d
do(x,y,z); while (a);
```
Such a statement is currently equivalent to:
```d
do {(x,y,z);} while (a);
```
But with *DoExpression* in the grammar it would instead be equivalent to:
```d
(x,y,z);
while (a);
```
Note that `while (a);` is a syntax error in D, so the breakage would not be a silent change of behaviour.

Once *CommaExpression* is fully deprecated and removed from the language, this
ambiguity will not exist.

### Examples

```d
// same expression, different syntax
assert((x, y, z) == do(x, y, z));

auto x = do(); // Error: do-expression requires at least one argument
```

## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2016 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Review

[Preliminary NG discussion](http://forum.dlang.org/post/nqem7g$1hm6$1@digitalmars.com)

### Decision

Disposition: REJECT. A proposal for a similar or identical feature would need
to be include qualitatively new motivation/evidence of usefulness.

### Rationale

(By means of background information, the comma operator has been a documented
source of bugs in the C, C++, and D languages. The D language has deemed that
virtually all bugs occur when the result of the operator (i.e. the last
expression in the comma-separated list) is used. Therefore, it has deprecated
that behavior, keeping the other uses legal.)

DIP1001 proposes a do-expression that behaves like the now-deprecated comma
operator, allowing the programmer to use `do(e1, e2)` for the semantics
equivalent to "e1, e2" in C/C++/former D, where e1 and e2 are (non-comma)
expressions, and similarly for three and more arguments. The obvious lowering
(not specified by the DIP) for e.g. three arguments is:

```D
do(e1, e2, e3)
```
=>
```D
{ e1; e2; return e3; }()
```

This would fit most use cases except those that require a reference to be
returned by e3. (For ref returns, refer to
https://issues.dlang.org/show_bug.cgi?id=16271.) Since the lowering is terse
and readable enough to be usable directly by the programmer (in addition to a
variety of other context-dependent idioms), a key question is whether the
frequency of usage justifies introducing a higher-level syntax that is
marginally more brief. DIP1001 does not present evidence of numerous codes
broken by the deprecation of the comma expression, and shows no examples of
coding patterns and idioms that would be plausibly frequent and improved by the
proposed construct.

Three points are given in the proposed rationale. The first is that the old
comma expression semantics is still necessary, but fails to mention the obvious
alternative (given above) of using a lambda expression.

The second rationale given is that the keyword "do" is currently underused.
This rationale does nor argue for the usefulness of the feature at hand.

The third rationale is that the implementation is simple and finished. Ease and
availability of implementation are obvious pluses for a feature, but cannot be
part of the core reasoning in favor of usefulness of said feature. (The
implication direction should be "useful features should ideally be easy to
implement", not "easy to implement features should ideally be useful").

The grammar change is shown but not the change to the language definition. This
observation has not contributed to the decision, but would be a request for
changes should the rationale be accepted.

Also reviewed from the forum discussion were the following arguments. (Please
note that future proposals would need to integrate arguments aired in forum
exchanges within the DIP in order to be formally considered.)

- Feature is inspired from Clojure, but no further argument to how its benefits
  in Clojure translate to D
- Discussion on a function seq() that is a partial replacement.
- Argument that the lambda equivalent is syntactically less clear.

Our assessment is that radically new arguments, angles, and examples would be
necessary to successfully push such a feature.
