# Callbacks For Matching Types

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1048                                                            |
| Author:         | Richard (Rikki) Andrew Cattermole <firstname@lastname.co.nz>    |
| Implementation: |                                                                 |
| Status:         | Formal Assessment                                               |

## Abstract

Callbacks for matching types is a quality-of-life feature that enables safer access and mutation of tagged union-like data representations. It adds syntax sugar on top of a switch statement to give convenient access to the union members without sacrificing safety.

## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Prior Work](#prior-work)
* [Description](#description)
* [Breaking Changes and Deprecations](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations)
* [Reference](#reference)
* [Copyright & License](#copyright--license)
* [Reviews](#reviews)

## Rationale

As a feature, pattern matching goes hand in hand with sum types. Although D has sum types in its standard library, the desire to have them in the language requires a way to express matching upon types. This proposal offers a solution that works with existing library types.

## Prior Work

This proposal aims to allow callbacks for types using pattern matching. It does not introduce full-featured pattern matching. In other languages, such as those in the ML family, pattern synonyms, pattern guards, values and literals, and nested type matching are all possible.

By limiting this proposal to what is currently in use in the ecosystem via less desirable means, this proposal is simplified to only what has proven to be needed today.

In the D ecosystem, pattern matching can be seen in some library tagged union types such as `std.sumtype`'s `match` function. This offers multiple dispatch and uses lambdas as callbacks.

## Description

A matching type is any type that includes the members `__tag`, `__tagTypes`, and a templated function `__tagValue`, which takes in the type.

A `__tag` member must evaluate to an integer that may not be sequential, although it may take the form of an `enum` or pointer.

A `__tag`'s range of values is determined by its evaluated type. If it is an `enum`, its members provide the range of possible results. Otherwise, it is provided by a fourth member, `__tagValues`.

When the compiler sees a match, it will map the match type to a set of tags that match it. If no type is provided, it will match all possible values and will act as the default. If a type is provided, it should be matched against overload resolution rules and an attempt made to find an exact match, otherwise it should use (the single) implicit conversion.

Each match contains multiple patterns. Only one pattern may be inferred per matching type using means similar to lambda parameter type inference. However, instead of inferring, each possible type that has not had a pattern will be instantiated as a fallback.

If a tag type is `void`, the parameter will be considered unreachable and cannot be loaded or stored into, but may be named.

It is an expression rather than a statement to enable future work of returning values.

```diff
PostfixExpression:
+    PostfixExpression '.' "match" DeclarationBlock

DeclDef:
+    MatchPattern ';'
+    MatchPatterns MatchPattern ';'

+ MatchPattern:
+    Identifier FunctionLiteralBody
+    ParameterWithAttributes FunctionLiteralBody
```

Inside of a match `DeclarationBlock`, only the rules `MatchPattern`, `ConditionalDeclaration`, `DebugSpecification`, `VersionSpecification`, `MixinDeclaration`, `AttributeSpecifier`, `ImportDeclaration`, `StaticForeachDeclaration`, and `StaticAssert` are valid. Outside of a match, the rule `MatchPattern` is not valid.

Visibility and safety are ignored for the `__tag` and `__tagValue` members. The members `__tagValues` and `__tagTypes` must be accessible.

When decomposed, a pattern match is syntax sugar surrounding a switch statement, and the callbacks are expected to be inlined. Decomposing to a switch statement enables existing optimizations for switch statements to enable faster execution without the need for a new class of optimizations.

```d
switch(tag) {
	case Context.__tagValues[2]:
		Callback();
		break;
	default:
		FallbackCallback();
		break;
}
```

Not all types may be matched. Tuples, for example, will need to employ a multiple-level dispatch strategy. One way to do this is by using nested switch statements to evaluate each level of the possible patterns. If a fallback pattern is applied as part of the nested patterns, only one given the nesting level may be a fallback.

```d
switch(tag[0]) {
	case Context1.__tagValues[2]:
		switch(tag[1]) {
		case Context2.__tagValues[9]:
			Callback();
			break;
		default:
			FallbackCallback1();
			break;
 		}
 		break;
 	default:
 		switch(tag[1]) {
 		default:
 			FallbackCallback2();
 			break;
 		}
 		break;
}
```

With syntax:

```d
tuple(first, second).match {
 	(Type1 v1, Type2 v2) {
 	};
    
 	(Type1 v1, v2) {
 	};
    
 	(v1, v2) {
 	};
}
```

## Example: Tagged Unions

Given a tag union type:

```d
import std.conv : text;

struct MyTaggedUnion(Types...) {
	alias __tagTypes = Types;

	private {
		size_t __tag;

		union {
			static foreach(i; 0 .. Types.length) {
				mixin("Types[i] " ~ i.text ~ ";");
 			}
 		}

 		ref Type __tagValue(Type)() {
 			return *cast(Type*)&this;
 		}
 	}
}
```

It can be used like this:

```d
alias MTU = MyTaggedUnion!(int, float, string);

MTU mtu1 = MTU(1.5);
MTU mtu2 = MTU("Rikki");

mtu1.match {
	(float v) => writeln("a float! ", v);
	v => writeln("catch all! ", v);
};

mtu2.match {
	(string name) => writeln("Who is awesome? ", name);
	_ => assert(0);
};
```

It is an error not to have a handler for all possible types. Either provide a catch-all pattern or handle all possible types.

```d
mtu1.match {
	(float v) => writeln("a float! ", v);
}; // Error: Pattern matching must handle all types `int`, `string`, were not handled.
```

## Example: Tagged Union AST

Abstract Syntax Trees can be represented by tagged unions with many benefits, and some compiler authors prefer them over classes coupled with the visitor pattern.

These are a different variant of tagged unions as they have a fixed set of possible values.

```d
import std.meta : AliasSeq;

struct Expression {
	alias __tagTypes = AliasSeq!(void, BinaryExpression, UnaryExpression);
	alias __tagValues = Type;

 	private {
 		Type type;
 		alias __tag = type;

 		ref BinaryExpression __tagValue(Type:BinaryExpression)() => binary;
 		ref UnaryExpression __tagValue(Type:UnaryExpression)() => unary;

		union {
			BinaryExpression binary;
			UnaryExpression unary;
		}

		enum Type {
 			Error,
 			Binary,
 			Unary
 		}
 	}
}

struct BinaryExpression {
}

struct UnaryExpression {
}
```

Its usage:

```d
Expression expr = ...;
expr.match {
	(ref BinaryExpression be) {
 	};
    
 	(ref UnaryExpression ue) {
 	};
    
	_ => assert(0);
};
```

## Breaking Changes and Deprecations

Existing members of a type may be called `match`. Unfortunately, this results in the possible breakage. However, this doesn't have to be the case.

Using a lookahead of one token, if `match` is followed by `{` then it is this feature, otherwise it should be treated as currently.

## Reference

An overview of all the different pattern-matching capabilities that mainstream languages offer can be found on [Wikipedia].(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pattern_matching)

Haskell's pattern synonyms: [link](https://ghc.gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/doc/users_guide/exts/pattern_synonyms.html).

## Copyright & License
Copyright (c) 2024 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## History
This DIP underwent one round of community feedback in the DIP Ideas forum:
https://forum.dlang.org/post/chzxzjiwsxmvnkthbdyy@forum.dlang.org

This DIP underwent one round of community feedback in the DIP Development forum:
https://forum.dlang.org/post/gyiwqxompgwmvztlkcuk@forum.dlang.org
