# Remove `body` as a Keyword

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1003                                                            |
| Author:         | Jared Hanson                                                    |
| RC#             | 3 [link][rclink]                                                |
| Implementation: |                                                                 |
| Status:         | Formal Review                                           |

[rclink]: https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/492bfa45905158e7bef5a8b2baf3e9da92d82662/DIPs/DIP1003.md


## Abstract

The word `body` is used in many day-to-day contexts that makes working around
the fact that it is a keyword in D tedious. Furthermore, this removal is very
often requested by various well known and lesser known D programmers. This DIP
proposes that the `body` keyword be removed and the word "body" be made
available for use as the name of a symbol. Various methods are put forward for
either replacing or entirely removing the role `body` currently serves in D's
contract programming syntax.

This proposal assumes basic knowledge of the terms "keyword" and "symbol" in
relation to D.

### Links

#### From the Spec
- [List of Keywords in D](http://dlang.org/spec/lex.html#Keyword)
- [Usage of the Body Keyword](http://dlang.org/spec/function.html#BodyStatement)
- [Usage of the Function Keyword](https://dlang.org/spec/expression.html#FunctionLiteral)

#### Forum Discussion
- [From 2011, on removing the body keyword](http://forum.dlang.org/thread/imdro4$286k$1@digitalmars.com)
- [From 2016, on the usage of body in user code](http://forum.dlang.org/thread/nyrosepldsxabewksehb@forum.dlang.org)
- [From 2016, anecdote of the word body used in an external C library ported to D](http://forum.dlang.org/post/lxdsvhygsaesjmkmavqp@forum.dlang.org)

#### Walter Bright on Contextual Keywords
- [From 2016, Walter Bright on why he opposes contextual keywords in D](http://forum.dlang.org/post/npsp8a$mv4$1@digitalmars.com)

## Description

The proposed changes to D are very simple, and are as follows:

1. Remove `body` as a keyword, or in the case of [Option 1](#option-1-contextual-keyword), implement `body` as a contextual keyword.
2. In the case of [Option 2](#option-2-allow-function-replace-body-after-deprecation), [Option 3](#option-3-allow-omitting-body-then-remove-body-after-deprecation) and [Option 4:](#option-4-a-combination-of-option-1-and-option-2), the regular deprecation process for language features must be followed. Using `body` as a keyword will be deprecated, then optionally a warning will be added. Finally, `body` will be removed as a keyword.
3. Allow the usage of the word "body" as a symbol name.

#### Option 1: Contextual Keyword

Keep the `body` keyword, but make it a contextual keyword and allow "body" as a
symbol name in all other contexts. It must be noted that Walter Bright [strongly opposes](#walter-bright-on-contextual-keywords) contextual keywords and is unlikely to support their long-term addition to DMD on the basis that they will complicate the parser.

The grammar will not have to change if this option is implemented.

#### Option 2: Allow `function`, replace `body` after deprecation

Add `function` as an optional keyword in the place of `body` and schedule the
`body` keyword for deprecation. After this period allow `body` as a symbol name. This option will require some user effort to adjust their code and does not have a migration path that is as easy as [Option 1](#option-1-contextual-keyword). However, it also does not require that contextual keywords be implemented.

The `function` keyword is readily available and has the same meaning when used
in the context of function contracts; it is very close in meaning to the `body`
keyword in this context. The `body` keyword is in fact shorthand for the term
"_function_ body", denoting the body of a function definition that contains the
actual code.  Therefore, replacing `body` with `function` will not make code any less clear in this context.  The author anticipates that these changes may
actually lead to _less_ confusion for programmers that are new to D.

However, it is possible that this function scope may be confused with a `function` literal by a person reading the source code. The author does not believe that this is a concern; there are multiple keywords that risk causing similar confusion and yet, in practice, D users do not have trouble distinguishing which usage is intended within the surrounding context. One such example is the `if` template constraint syntax that looks identical to the regular `if`-statement syntax, save for the fact that it is only present after a template declaration.

The grammar will change as follows:
```
# This
BodyStatement:
    body BlockStatement

# Becomes this
BodyStatement:
    function BlockStatement
```

A variation suggested by [David Gileadi](http://forum.dlang.org/post/off8ag$3t5$1@digitalmars.com) and [Random D user](http://forum.dlang.org/post/rhuxwyotfctdfzxguatv@forum.dlang.org) is to replace `body` with `do` instead of `function`, but otherwise remains the same. Andrei Alexandrescu has [informally expressed](http://forum.dlang.org/post/offf3e$hl1$1@digitalmars.com) his preference for using `do` as opposed to `function`.

#### Option 3: Allow omitting `body`, then remove `body` after deprecation

Allow the function body to optionally be annotated with `body`, but do not
require it. Schedule the `body` keyword for deprecation. After this period,
allow body as a symbol name. This option will require roughly the same amount of user effort to adjust their code as [Option 2](#option-2-allow-function-replace-body-after-deprecation). The migration path is also similar. It also does not require that contextual keywords be implemented. Finally, as a keyword is not necessary to designate the body of a function, this option will make the language more consistent in that function
bodies never have to be annotated, whether they have a contract or not. Finally, it has the advantage of reducing the cost of D's contract syntax by one line, assuming that the `body` or `function` keyword is placed on its own line ([example](#shorter-contracts)).

There are two ways to change the grammar to accomodate this feature:
```
# This
BodyStatement:
    body BlockStatement

# Becomes this
BodyStatement:
    BlockStatement
```

Or alternatively:

```
#This
FunctionLiteralBody:
    BlockStatement
    FunctionContracts_opt BodyStatement

FunctionBody:
    BlockStatement
    FunctionContracts_opt BodyStatement
    FunctionContracts

# Becomes this
FunctionLiteralBody:
    BlockStatement
    FunctionContracts_opt BlockStatement

FunctionBody:
    BlockStatement
    FunctionContracts_opt BlockStatement
    FunctionContracts
```

#### Option 4: A combination of Option 1 and Option 2

Suggested by [Walter Bright](http://forum.dlang.org/post/of9tmv$2boe$1@digitalmars.com).

1. Introduce 'function' as an alternative to 'body'.
2. Turn 'body' into a contextual keyword.
3. Deprecate 'body' as a contextual keyword.
4. Eventually remove 'body' as a contextual keyword.

The advantages of this are:

1. 'body' can immediately be used as a regular identifier.
2. Existing code is not immediately broken.
3. Can have a decent deprecation period for users using 'body'.
4. No long term problems with contextual keywords.

This is the preferred option as it has the easiest migration path (on par with [Option 1](#option-1-contextual-keyword)). It has an advantage over [Option 1](#option-1-contextual-keyword) in that it does not require `body` to become a contextual keyword in the long-term, as eventually body will be removed and will no longer be a contextual keyword. It does, however, risk causing confusion to new users of D as it will have to be explained why _either_ symbol is allowed.

The grammar will change as follows while `function` and `body` are both allowed:
```
# This
BodyStatement:
    body BlockStatement

# Becomes this
BodyStatement:
    body BlockStatement
    function BlockStatement
```

After `body` is deprecated and removed, the grammar will be the same as is outlined in [Option 2](#option-2-allow-function-replace-body-after-deprecation).

If this option is rejected as well as [Option 1](#option-1-contextual-keyword), the recommended option is [Option 3](#option-3-allow-omitting-body-then-remove-body-after-deprecation). [Option 2](#option-2-allow-function-replace-body-after-deprecation) is to be
considered only if options 1 and 3 are rejected. This is because [Option1](#option-1-contextual-keyword) requires no deprecation and will not break user code, and option 3 simplifies the language as compared to option 2.

### Rationale

Many D programmers [complain](#forum-discussion) about `body` being a keyword in D. It is a commonly used word in many different fields and as such, a programmer working in these fields will regularly come into contact with the fact that it is a keyword (much to their annoyance).

Furthermore, D's contract programming features are rarely used compared to how
useful and desirable it is to be able to name a symbol "body". In the whole of
Phobos, there are fewer than 300 uses of the `body` keyword, which is very small compared to the library's total line count. However, even if D's contract
programming features _were_ heavily used, it would not compensate for the
inconvenience caused by `body` being a keyword. One of the reasons for this is
that there is only **one** context in which body is used, compared to the many
different contexts in user code in which the word "body" may be used as a symbol name. Another reason is that the keyword is not required from a parsing
perspective; an unannotated function block could be used with no difficulties.

Therefore, this keyword does not "pull its weight" syntactically. Even a simple
comment marking the function body could serve the same purpose, but would allow
the use of `body` as a symbol name. This makes it very disruptive and annoying
when encountering such an issue in one's code.

A partial list of the contexts in which the word `body` might be used as a symbol name:

- In web programming where "body" is a required tag in any valid HTML document. Ex:
- It is a name commonly used for XML tags and/or attributes
- Physics simulations as well in astronomical contexts ("planetary bodies", etc.)
- Video games, such as referring to the player character's body
- Working with HTTP requests and responses, which have a body
- Working programmatically with emails, which have a body
- Many external C and C++ libraries make use of "body" as a symbol name, making
  porting these to D and creating bindings for them more difficult
- Writing compilers and parsers (functions, loops, etc. all have bodies)
- Scripting interfaces and wrappers

Examples of game physics library code ported to D that use body as a symbol:

- [Example 1: dchip](https://github.com/d-gamedev-team/dchip/blob/55f43e5f0cf67c8bc190711b69eb16230fa6188e/src/dchip/cpBody.d#L184)
- [Example 2: dbox](https://github.com/d-gamedev-team/dbox/blob/6f81fe065abec1e7def44fc777c5d8e9da936104/examples/demo/tests/bodytypes.d#L103)
- [Example 3: chipmunkd](https://github.com/rcorre/chipmunkd/commit/d6bde5b649c70a53f4295f522e660fae3c1e740f)

### Breaking changes / deprecation process

If `body` becomes a contextual keyword, such as in [Option
1](#option-1-contextual-keyword), there will be no code breakage and no effort.
The `body` keyword is not required from a parsing perspective; an unannotated
function block could be used with no difficulties. Alternatively, the `function` keyword is readily available and has the same meaning when used in the context of function contracts; it is very close in meaning to the `body` keyword in this context. The `body` keyword is in fact shorthand for the term "_function_ body", denoting the body of a function defintion that contains the actual code. Therefore, these changes will not be any less descriptive of what the keyword means in this context than the keyword `body`. It is anticipated that these changes may actually lead to _less_ confusion for programmers that are new to D.

Also, the author believes that the `function` keyword is not as "overloaded",
with different meanings in different contexts, as other keywords such as
`static`. Therefore, these proposed changes will not unduly "overload" the
keyword `function`. There are currently 2 other contexts in which the `function` keyword is already used:

- Function variable type definitions
- Function literal definitions

Examples:
```D
int function(char c) fp; //Function variable type definition

fp = function int(char c) { return 6; }; //Function literal definition

int function() fp2 = function { return 0; }
```

If one considers that each keyword in a language entails a certain cost in terms of what names a user may use as a symbol, as well as the fact that new users must learn what each keyword means, then it follows that allowing `function` to be used in the context of function contracts has a much "cheaper" tradeoff than using `body`. Therefore, it makes sense logically to remove the `body` keyword, which has a high cost with a low return on investment, with the `function` keyword, which also has a relatively high cost, but a much better return on investment.

### Examples

#### How "body" might be used as a variable name in DOM-based code
```D
document.body.addEventListener("click"), (Event ev) { //Error, body is a keyword
    ev.target.appendText("got click!");
    ev.preventDefault();
});
```

#### How "body" Is Currently Used in Physics Simulation Code
```D
void cpBodyActivateStatic(cpBody* body_, cpShape* filter)
{
    cpAssertHard(cpBodyIsStatic(body_), "cpBodyActivateStatic() called on a non-static body_.");

    mixin(CP_BODY_FOREACH_ARBITER!("body_", "arb", q{
        if (!filter || filter == arb.a || filter == arb.b)
        {
            cpBodyActivate(arb.body_a == body_ ? arb.body_b : arb.body_a);
        }
    }));
}
```

#### Examples of How Code Will Change with This Proposal
[Option 1:](#option-1-contextual-keyword)
```D
//There is no change from how it is currently written in D
int div(int a, int b)
in { assert(b != 0); }
body
{
    return a / b;
}

auto div = function(int a, int b) in { assert(b != 0); } body { return a / b; };
```

[Option 2:](#option-2-allow-function-replace-body-after-deprecation)
```D
int div(int a, int b)
in { assert(b != 0); }
function
{
    return a / b;
}

auto div = function(int a, int b) in { assert(b != 0); } function { return a / b; };

//Or alternatively
int div(int a, int b)
in { assert(b != 0); }
do
{
    return a / b;
}

auto div = function(int a, int b) in { assert(b != 0); } do { return a / b; };
```

[Option 3:](#option-3-allow-omitting-body-then-remove-body-after-deprecation)
```D
int div(int a, int b)
in { assert(b != 0); }
{
    return a / b;
}

auto div = function(int a, int b) in { assert(b != 0); } { return a / b; };
```

#### Shorter Contracts
```D
//This is typically how function contracts are written today
void sqrt(int n)
in
{
    assert(n >= 0);
}
out (result)
{
    assert(result * result == n)
}
body
{
    //Implementation
}

//Option 3 reduces the number of lines by 1
void sqrt(int n)
in
{
    assert(n >= 0);
}
out (result)
{
    assert(result * result == n);
}
{
    //Implementation
}
```

[Option 4:](#option-4-a-combination-of-option-1-and-option-2)

This will be the same as [Option 2:](#option-2-allow-function-replace-body-after-deprecation), save for the fact that users may use `body` as symbol immediately instead of waiting for it to be deprecated and removed as a keyword.

## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2016 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

### Reviews
[Formal review feedback](http://forum.dlang.org/thread/wcqebjzdjxldeywlxjcd@forum.dlang.org)

[Preliminary NG discussion](http://forum.dlang.org/thread/qgxvrbxrvkxtimzvnetu@forum.dlang.org)
