# Tail Call Optimization requirement

| Section         | Value                                                       |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1000                                                        |
| Author:         | Dietrich Daroch (name dot surname on gmail)                 |
| Implementation: | (links to implementation PR if any)                         |
| Status:         | -                                                           |



## Abstract

Add a way to enforce tail call optimization (TCO). Currently TCO is applied as
 an optimization, but it's not always clear to the user that it was applied.
The user may wrongly expect it to happen, or future changes can break it's
 applicability. This would not only cause a performance loss, but also introduce
 the possibility of overflowing the call stack on runtime.



### Links
  1. [NASA's Jet Propulsion Lab C guidelines](http://lars-lab.jpl.nasa.gov/JPL_Coding_Standard_C.pdf) ban recursion because of the uncertainty of stack overflow.
  2. [Scala's @tailrec](http://www.scala-lang.org/files/archive/nightly/docs/library/index.html#scala.annotation.tailrec) seeks to produce errors instead of poor code.
  3. [D Spec on pragmas](http://dlang.org/spec/pragma.html#predefined-pragmas) allows ignoring current predefined ones.
  4. [Discussion on D forum](http://forum.dlang.org/thread/kmlorniwvjyivjyjntfu@forum.dlang.org) (you'll have to ignore some posts).
  5. [TCO & Trampolines](http://blog.richdougherty.com/2009/04/tail-calls-tailrec-and-trampolines.html) are used to produce efficient code.


## Description

The goal of this DIP is to introduce a way to declare that TCO is required for
 some functions. This would introduce better guarantees about the program's
 execution.

For some applications, having a crash due to a Stack Overflow is forbidden [1]
 and as it's currently not possible to rely on TCO, recursion is banned.

The change would introduce a way to declare the need for TCO, forcing a
 Compilation Error if the compiler is not able to apply the optimization.

Having a mechanism to break the build reduces portability of new programs, but it
 ensures that ported programs keep their efficiency and won't suddenly blow the
 call stack.
Also, the failing build would point out where a fix is needed for the new
 platform to keep the performance and stability rather than silently building
 worse binaries as it would occur today if compiler and target platform change.
To alleviate portability problems, an accurate description of when TCO MUST be
 applied will reduce differences between compilers, but to eliminate the
 chance of inconsistencies it is required to solve TCO earlier, possibly on an
 Intermediate Language.


#### Tagging functions

Even if all compilers automatically apply TCO where applicable, tagging where
 TCO was expected would bring benefits, as it would allow to fix code that was
 expected to be efficient, but it was not.

##### Attribute
`@tco` is considered, as it would follow `@nogc`.

Some dislike using attributes, but being tail recursive is indeed a property of
 a function. Other languages like Scala already use the `@tailrec` attribute to
 solve the same concern of this DIP [2,5].

##### Pragma
`pragma(tco, true)` would follow the use of `pragma(inline, true)`.

Pragmas are a way to pass additional information to compilers that is already
 present on the language.

The D spec allows to ignore currently predefined pragmas [3], but having a TCO
 pragma can solve the problem if the spec would require that ignored pragmas
 raise a warning and also add compiler flags to suppress or raise them into
 errors.


#### Other alternatives

##### Trampolines

Trampolines [5] allow to run tail recursive functions calls on a loop, effectively
 reducing the stack space needed to only 2 frames.

While trampolines provide an alternative that would solve the problem, they
 introduce an overhead that would not exist if TCO was applied.



### Rationale

It can be argued that tail recursive functions are usually clearer than their
 explicit loop in-place formulation, but the latter has been historically
 preferred to gain predictable execution and no chance for a stack overflow.

The focus of this DIP is to remove the need to enforce this pattern by allowing
 recursive functions to explicitly state their need for Tail Call Optimization,
 up to the point that a Compilation Error is preferred if it's not possible to
 apply.



### Breaking changes / deprecation process

#### Breaking changes

Breakage varies with the used solution. Note that this only considers breakage of
 current code, as the proposal is to break future code when TCO is not applied.

##### Attribute
Unless there's a clash with a User Defined Attribute the should be no
 additional breakage.
Alternative names with fewer chances to collide are discussed later.

##### Pragma
There is no breakage.

##### Trampolines
Trampolines any breakage.


#### Deprecation
There is no deprecation involved.



### Examples

``` d
@tco  // Should fail compilation (at least ldc -O3 can't optimize this)
int factorial(int n) {
	if(n<2)
		return 1;
	return n*factorial(n-1);
}

@tco  // Compiles <=> the compiler applied the Tail Call Optimization
int accFactorial(int n, int acc=1) {
	if(n<2)
		return acc;
	return accFactorial(n-1, n*acc);
}
```



### Discussion

#### Attribute/Identifier Name
There's been some discussion about the name for the attribute,
 the following names have been considered,
  * tco (following @nogc short name)
  * tailrec  (as on Scala's @tailrec)
  * forceTailCallOptimization (to avoid short unmeaningful names)
Discussion on the name should be considered lower priority.



## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2016 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)


### Reviews

Not yet reviewed.
