# Providing more selective control over contracts

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | DIP1006                                                         |
| RC#             | 0                                                               |
| Author:         | Mathias Lang - mathias.lang@sociomantic.com                     |
| Implementation: | None                                                            |
| Status:         | Will be set by the DIP manager (e.g. "Approved" or "Rejected")  |


## Abstract

A proposal to expose a way to selectively disable some of D's contract features
(invariant, `in` / `out` and `assert`).


### Links

Limited D1 implementation, used by Sociomantic: https://github.com/dlang/dmd/pull/6347


## Description

Add a command-line switch, named `-contracts` in this proposal, which takes 4 possible values:

- `all`: the default, present for completeness and scripts, so one can just append it to a generated command line to enable all contracts checks.
- `noinvariant`: Disable implicit `invariant` calls, but leaves function's `in` / `out` contracts and `assert` in.
- `assert`: Disable `invariant` blocks and `in` / `out` contracts, but leaves `assert` in.
- `none`: Disable all `invariant`, `in` and `out` contracts, and `assert`.

Note that the `noinvariant` value only disables implicit calls to invariant. Explicit calls can only disabled by disabling `assert`.


### Rationale

#### Prelude on contracts

Under the broad name "Contracts", we regroup 4 of D features: `assert`, `in` contracts, `out` contracts and `invariant`.
Contracts in D are a mean to do sanity checking. A contract that fails is a sign of a faulty logic in the code.
Since contracts should never fail, the currently advertised approach for D programers is to use them during development,
then deploy a `-release` build of the application for maximum performances.

Contracts naturally fit in a hierarchy, where `assert` is the most basic block (being used by others),
and `invariant` is meant for expensive sanity checking. `in` and `out` contracts are located in between.

#### Cost of contracts

`assert` and `in` / `out` contracts follow a pay-for-what-you-use approach: an `assert` which is never executed is free,
and a `in` or `out` contract on a function that is never called is also free of runtime overhead.

`invariant` stand out in that regard: they can be used on a pay-for-what-you-use basis, by using `assert(object)` (or `assert(this)`),
but they are also implicitly called twice on every `public` and `protected` class method call.
The call itself is not direct: the compiler inserts a call to `_d_invariant`, [which can be found in druntime](https://github.com/dlang/druntime/blob/v2.072.0/src/rt/invariant.d).
The code being very simple results in the class hierarchy to be traversed completely twice (no caching is done)
for every call, even for classes which do not define any invariant.

Profiling some real-time applications within Sociomantic showed that `_d_invariant` was the most expensive call in the application.
Affected applications were using little or no invariant, but since Sociomantic code is mostly writen in an OOP style,
simply disabling invariants (with no other optimization) led to 20% more throughput.

#### Issues with the current approach

Testing can be complete and it is not rare to miss a scenario that can show up any time in a production setting.
In such a case, having a contract not failing where it should can lead to costs higher than the one induced by a crash of the application.
Example of such case include critical data corruption and unexpected monetary spending.

For this reason, developers are often wary of disabling such safety features, even in production, as long as the performance cost is acceptable.
What can be viewed as an acceptable performance cost is up to the end user and the code base.
Any OOP-intensive code will want to get rid of `invariant` as a first step, while code more function-oriented might be more interested in disabling `in` / `out`.

#### Considered alternatives

The 4 values available to the user are voluntarily simple and hierarchical. It makes little sense to allow any contracts without enabling asserts.
It would be feasible to allow `invariant` without `in` and `out` contracts, or only `out` contracts, only `in` contracts, or some other combination.
Since providing all combinations would increase complexity, but doesn't yet provide an obvious advantage, it was left out of this proposal (but can be subject to another one).

Since this proposal was heavily motivated by the cost of invariant, an obvious alternative is to reduce said cost.
However, the cost of having `invariant` enabled will never be null for builds that do not use invariants at all, which is the real motivation for this feature.

Finally, this functionality is already implemented in LDC via `-enable-invariants={0,1}`.
Standardizing it would simplify user's life and allow tooling that deals with multiple compilers (e.g. `dub`, IDEs...) to provide this option.

### Breaking changes / deprecation process

Since this behavior is entirely opt-in, no breaking change is expected.

### Implementation difficulty

The reference front-end already segments those functionality into separate flags, hence the implementation should be trivial.

## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2016 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Review

Preliminary Review Round 1 is currently under way. See the [review thread](http://forum.dlang.org/post/rsafosvkhxddkxptaziy@forum.dlang.org) to follow or participate.
