# Hooking D's struct move semantics

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1014                                                            |
| Review Count:   | 2                                                               |
| Author:         | Shachar Shemesh                                                 |
| Implementation: |                                                                 |
| Status:         | Accepted                                                        |

## Abstract

The current language definitions prohibits a struct type from maintaining external/internal references
to its instance, as D might choose to move a struct instance around by a simple bit-copy operation.

The purpose of this DIP is to maintain this ability, while also allowing internal and external references
to the instance. This is achieved by allowing the struct to define a postblit-like callback, called
`opPostMove`, that will be called after the move, allowing the struct to update any references invalidated
by the move.

### Reference

* [Issue #17448](https://issues.dlang.org/show_bug.cgi?id=17448): Problems arising from lack of
such support, as well as discussions on why it is needed.
* [C++'s solution to the same problem](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/move_constructor)

## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Terminology](#terminology)
* [Description](#description)
  * [Outline](#outline)
  * [`__move_post_blt`'s implementation](#move_post_blts-implementation)
  * [`opPostMove`](#opPostMove)
  * [Code emitted by the compiler on move](#code-emitted-by-the-compiler-on-move)
  * [`opPostMove` Decoration Considerations](#opmove-decoration-considerations)
* [Examples](#examples)
  * [Internal Reference](#internal_reference)
  * [External Reference](#external_reference)
* [Performance Considerations](#performance-considerations)
* [Effect on Phobos](#effect-on-phobos)
* [Breaking Changes and Deprecations](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations)
* [Reviews](#reviews)

## Rationale

D compilers are allowed to move (instead of destroying) stack allocated struct objects that have reached
the end of their scope. While this may be a very useful feature, it does mean certain programming patterns
become more difficult.

The limitation is usually phrased as "D structs may not contain pointers to themselves". While that limitation is
correct, it is not the only one. For example, D structs also may not use the constructor/destructor to register themselves
with a global registry that keeps track of all instances in the system, e.g. via a linked list. This also
severely limits the ability to store delegates that reference the struct instance from outside the struct.

While not all of these scenarios will be easily solved by this DIP, without it the programmer is left with *zero* tools to
tackle the problem, even if she is lucky enough to spot it before it causes memory corruption.

## Terminology

Whenever an upper case vowel is used (MAY, SHOULD, MUST NOT), its meaning should be taken as defined in
[RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

## Description

### Outline

The DIP suggests the following changes:

1. A new function, called `__move_post_blt`, will be added to DRuntime.
1. The user MAY define a member function, called `opPostMove`, in structs. If defined, the function
MUST follow a well-defined interface.
1. When deciding to move a struct instance, the compiler MUST emit a call to the struct's `__move_post_blt`
after blitting the instance and before releasing the memory containing the old instance. `__move_post_blt`
MUST receive references to both the pre- and post-move instances.

### `__move_post_blt`'s implementation

`__move_post_blt` SHOULD be defined in a manner that is compatible with the following code:

```D
void __move_post_blt(S)(ref S newLocation, ref S oldLocation) nothrow if( is(S==struct) ) {
    foreach(memberName; __traits(allMembers, S)) {
        static if( is( typeof(__traits(getMember, S, memberName))==struct ) ) {
            mixin("__move_post_blt( newLocation." ~ memberName ~ ", oldLocation." ~ memberName ~ " );");
        }
    }

    static if( __traits(hasMember, S, "opPostMove") ) {
        newLocation.opPostMove(oldLocation);
    }
}
```

Please note that `S` might also be `shared`, `immutable` or `const`.

### `opPostMove`

`opPostMove`, if defined, MUST be a `nothrow` function that updates the external/internal references
after they have already been copied. Implementors SHOULD also make it `@nogc` and either `@safe` or
`@trusted`.

Implementors MAY define `opPostMove` for `const` and/or `immutable` instances. If they do, the implementation
code MAY safely modify the data in the destination location for the object, as that has no pointers
referencing it. Such modifications will require a cast.

Whether it is safe to modify external data referenced to by pointers stored in the struct (as in the
case of an intrusive linked list), or the data in the source address of the move, heavily depends on
the specifics of the precise semantics of those pointers. The user documentation for `opPostMove` MUST
explain what is guaranteed to be safe and what is not.

Implementors may also choose not to define `const`/`immutable` versions of `opPostMove`. This will result
in a compile-time error should the compiler try to move an instance of such a struct.

The documentation for an `opPostMove` implementation MUST also emphasize that while manipulating the
memory at the `opPostMove` source location is allowed, the memory will be released with no destruction
immediately after the function's return. Implementors SHOULD be encouraged to define the source argument
to `opPostMove` as `const ref`, to gain some compiler protection against accidental manipulation. This
does not harm the implementor's access to the data, as she already has a copy at the destination
location.

### Code emitted by the compiler on move

When moving a struct's instance, the compiler MUST call `__move_post_blt` giving it both new and old
instances' addresses.

### `opPostMove` Decoration Considerations

`opPostMove` SHOULD be `@nogc`, and either `@safe` or `@trusted`. If these attributes are not present,
trying to compile code that moves a struct instance from within a context that is `@nogc` or `@safe`
MUST result in a compilation error. `opPostMove`, if implemented, MUST be `nothrow`.

These attributes could be forced by decorating `__move_post_blt` itself as `nothrow @nogc @safe`, thus
preventing `opPostMove` from being defined any other way. Doing so is not recommended, as the user might
opt not to use, e.g., `@safe` anywhere in her program. It would not make sense to force her to use it
in `opPostMove`. Due to attribute inference on template functions, if the `opPostMove` implementation
of all of an instance's members are, e.g., `@nogc`, D will automatically define `__move_post_blt` as
`@nogc` for that struct.

This proposal does require that `nothrow` be defined on `opPostMove`, because throwing would mean a
change in the program flow from a place that appears to execute no code. There is a danger that this
will be too confusing for the programmer to properly take into account.

## Examples

In order to facilitate discussion, following are a couple of concrete examples where `opPostMove` is needed in order to maintain
correctness.

### Internal Reference

Consider a struct that keeps track of a number. This may be either a local (per struct) number or a global one. One possible
implementation would be:

``` D
struct Tracker {
    static uint globalCounter;
    uint localCounter;
    bool isLocal;

    @disable this(this);

    this(bool local) {
        isLocal = local;
        localCounter = 0;
    }

    void increment() {
        if( isLocal )
            localCounter++;
        else
            globalCounter++;
    }
}
```

The use of an `if` clause to determine who to update has potentially grave performance implications. Unless branch prediction is
successful, a branch is an expensive operation on modern CPUs. If the instances of the struct are evenly distributed between
global and local updates, branch prediction is expected to fail in 50% of the cases, and the performance of this implementation
is going to be quite bad.

Making `isLocal` a template argument will solve the branch prediction problem, but is only possible if the determination of
local vs. global is known at compile time, which it might not be.

A more performant solution is to use a pointer:

``` D
struct Tracker {
    static uint globalCounter;
    uint localCounter;
    uint* counter;

    @disable this(this);

    this(bool local) {
        localCounter = 0;
        if( local )
            counter = &localCounter;
        else
            counter = &globalCounter;
    }

    void increment() {
        (*counter)++;
    }

    void opPostMove(const ref Tracker oldLocation) {
        if( counter is &oldLocation.localCounter )
            counter = &localCounter;
    }
}
```

## Performance Considerations

The `__move_post_blt` expansion for structs that do not define `opPostMove`, and for which none of the
members `opPostMove` is defined, will result in an implementation that which recursively calls empty
functions for its member instances. The compiler should be able to elide this series of calls via inlining.
As such, the run-time cost for this feature for structs that do not use it will be zero.

If compiler implementers fear that inlining will not elide these calls where applicable, they MAY manually
eliminate no-op sub-trees. This may be done by adding, at the beginning of `__move_post_blt`:

```D
static if( !hasElaborateMove!S )
    return;
```

Such an addition incurs some compile-time cost in the case that an inner member does have `opPostMove`
defined, as it performs multiple scans of the subtrees during the recursive descent. It does, however,
guarantee zero run time cost, regardless of compiler optimization capabilities.

Structs that do define `opPostMove` manage their own costs.

## Effect on Phobos

This proposal has minimal impact on Phobos. Even if `opPostMove` is defined for a struct, the compiler's
handling, detailed above, should make sure Phobos is, largely, not affected.

The exceptions are:

* The `move` family of functions defined in `std.algorithm` MUST be updated to add a call to `__move_post_blt`.
* The `swap` functions SHOULD, depending on precise implementation, need to be similarly updated.
* A new template, `hasElaborateMove`, SHOULD be added to `std.traits`. This MUST return `true` iff
a struct or any of its members have an `opPostMove` defined.

## Breaking Changes and Deprecations

There are no breaking changes introduced by the proposal itself, as struct types have to explicitly
opt-in to this change to see any change in behavior at all.

This proposal does add two functions with special meaning. One of them is in the reserved space, so should
not break anything. If an existing struct has a function called `opPostMove`, however, switching to an implementation that
supports this DIP will break the old code.

Since it is generally understood by D programmers that `op*` functions are for operator overloads, this problem should not
be common.

## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2018 by Weka.IO ltd.

Licensed under [This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)

## Reviews

### Community Review Round 1

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/38cec74a7471735559e3b8a7553f55102d289d28/DIPs/DIP1014.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/thread/zfyfhqczkrfdpfkcabna@forum.dlang.org)

The point was made that the proposal may require a change in the D ABI, due to the approach D takes in passing by-value non-POD structs as function arguments. The DIP author agreed.

One criticism was that the proposed feature breaks @safety. The DIP author pointed out that the only non-safe aspect is the moving of const/immutable structs, and that the DIP already addresses this by advocating casting the constness away. In that case, @system or @trusted is required.

### Final Review

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/01af4bb1e81993066bd1e7f77263002d3883fabf/DIPs/DIP1014.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/rrdtjzjwanjlcnhhkaud@forum.dlang.org)

At the time this review took place, a related DIP titled "[Copy Constructor](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/pull/129)" was under development. A question was raised about how this proposal and that one interact. The DIP author revealed that a conversation with one of the Language Maintainers at DConf had confirmed for him that the two proposals are not in conflict.

One reviewer asked what would happen if a programmer should define an `opPostMove` function as a `class` member. The DIP author said it should be ignored as it is today, but was not sure if the proposal should explicitly say such.

An objection was raised to the requirement that `opPostMove` be `nothrow` on the grounds that the justification of "it might be confusing if it's not" was weak. The DIP author suggested the requirement could be eased to "a very hearty recommendation" because D moves "everywhere" and it is "impossible" to prevent it from doing so.

The point was made that allowing `opPostMove` to be overidden raises the question of what to do when it is annotated with `@disable`. The concensus was that, in such a case, an actual attempt to move the object would result in a compilation error.

A question was raised about defining `opPostMove` on classes. The DIP author ultimately suggested it should be handled the same way an `opAssign` is currently handled for classes.

An objection was raised to the DIP using terminology that specifies what the compiler should do vs. how it should behave, e.g. "the compiler MUST call". The DIP author suggested he is willing to drop such explicit terminology and instead specify the desired outcome, i.e. the compiler should behave as if it had taken some specific action.

A suggestion was made that the DIP should specify the order of calls for compound structs. The DIP author responded that the proposal handles the only case of order-specific calls required (the `opPostMove` on instance members must be called before that of the instance itself).

### Formal Assessment

The language maintainers agreed that "this is not a DIP we want, but a DIP we need", and declared that there have been a number of issues that have cropped up demonstrating such a need. As an example, they cited the recent (at the time of review) discovery that the C++ `std::string` uses internal pointers.

Given the lack of any compelling alternative, they were in agreement in approving this proposal.