# Tail Call Optimization requirement

| Section         | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1337                                                            |
| Author:         | Dietrich Daroch (name dot surname on gmail)                     |
| Implementation: | (links to implementation PR if any)                             |
| Status:         | -                                                               |



## Abstract

Add an attribute that forces tail call optimization.


### Links

Optional sections containing links to existing discussions, research papers or any
other supplemental materials.



## Description

The change would introduce a new attribute, `@tco` that can be used on functions
 to declare their need for tail call optimization (TCO). Functions that hold this
 attribute will throw a Compilation Error if the compiler is not able to solve
 recursive calls using TCO.
This allows to rely on this common optimization without uncertainty on the
 performance and call stack usage.


### Rationale

It can be argued that tail recursive functions are usually clearer than their
 explicit loop in-place formulation, but the latter has been historically
 preferred* to gain predictable execution and no chance for a stack overflow.

The focus of this DIP is to remove the need to enforce this pattern by allowing
 recursive functions to explicitly state their need for Tail Call Optimization,
 up to the point that a Compilation Error is preferred if it's not possible to 
 apply.


* [NASA's Jet Propulsion Lab C guidelines](http://lars-lab.jpl.nasa.gov/JPL_Coding_Standard_C.pdf) enforce no use of recursion.
    "Do not use direct or indirect recursion.".


### Breaking changes / deprecation process

Unless the user had a `@tco` attribute set there should be no breakage at all.
Maybe the attribute name should be changed to `@forceTailCallOptimization` to
 ensure that the chances of collision with User Defined Attributes are minimal,
 but `@tco` would follow short names like `@nogc`.

There is no deprecation involved.


### Examples

``` d
@tco  // Should fail compilation (at least ldc -O3 can't optimize this)
int factorial(int n) {
    return n*factorial(n-1);
}

@tco  // Compiles <=> the compiler applied the Tail Call Optimization
int accFactorial(int n, int acc=1) {
    return accFactorial(n-1, n*acc);
}
```



## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2016 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)


### Reviews

Not yet reviewed.
