# Deprecate Brace-Style Struct Initializers

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1031                                                            |
| Review Count:   | 1                                                               |
| Author:         | Walter Bright walter@digitalmars.com                            |
| Implementation: |                                                                 |
| Status:         | Withdrawn                                                       |

## Abstract

With the adoption of named argument lists, the brace-style struct initializer
syntax is redundant with that of function-style struct literals. Removing
the brace-style will reduce the complexity of the language.

## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Prior Work](#prior-work)
* [Description](#description)
* [Breaking Changes and Deprecations](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations)
* [Reference](#reference)
* [Copyright & License](#copyright--license)
* [Reviews](#reviews)

## Rationale

Having two equivalent means to achieve the same effect is a pointless redundancy in a language.
Even worse, it engenders bikeshedding debates about which approach is "better". It's better
to have one way of achieving the effect in that it reduces the complexity of the compiler, the specification,
and efforts to teach the language.

## Prior Work

This DIP presumes the acceptance of [DIP 1030: Named Arguments](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/846a6ae37f731cd2e17d2249272b07555a4e7400/DIPs/DIP1030.md).

## Description

Deprecate support for the brace-style struct initializer syntax.

### Grammar

The syntax for [StructInitializer](https://dlang.org/spec/declaration.html#StructInitializer)
will be deprecated and eventually removed.

## Breaking Changes and Deprecations

Suggest users replace brace-style initialization with struct literals.

```d
struct S { int a, b; }

S s = { 1, 2 }; // Deprecated: use S(1, 2) instead
```

## Reference

1. [StructInitializer](https://dlang.org/spec/declaration.html#StructInitializer)
2. [DIP 1030: Named Arguments](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/846a6ae37f731cd2e17d2249272b07555a4e7400/DIPs/DIP1030.md)

## Copyright & License
Copyright (c) 2019 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Reviews

### Community Review Round 1

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/c0c1c9f9665e0bc1db611f4e93e793d64451f763/DIPs/DIP1031.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/uivuxsycynvgvslkkzmx@forum.dlang.org)

[Feedback](https://forum.dlang.org/post/iywiuqqmevdghgbyrved@forum.dlang.org)


Feedback in the Feedback thread was very light. Specific points:
* One commenter suggested more cons for the brace-style initializers.
* The motivation is weak. Better if the rationale expressed that DIP 1030 was the motivation. The DIP author asserted that redundancy is a good motivation.
* Will the breakage be as simple as the DIP suggests? The DIP author sees no further complications.
* Neither this DIP nor DIP 1030 specify a default struct literal syntax supporting named parameters in the absence of a constructor.

The Discussion thread went on for several pages. Some expressed support for the change, others were against it, others suggested modifications.

## Addendum
Subsequent to Community Review Round 1, the DIP author chose to withdraw this DIP from consideration.