
# String Interpolation Tuple Literals

| Field           | Value                                                       |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1036                                                        |
| Review Count:   | 2                                                           |
| Author:         | Adam D. Ruppe<br>Steven Schveighoffer schveiguy@gmail.com   |
| Implementation: |                                                             |
| Status:         | Withdrawn                                                   |

## Abstract

Create a new type of literal that allows interleaving string literal data with
expression data. Such literals can be used
wherever strings are required, but can also be accepted via overload by
functions.

## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Prior Work](#prior-work)
* [Description](#description)
* [Breaking Changes and Deprecations](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations)
* [Reference](#reference)
* [Copyright & License](#copyright--license)
* [Reviews](#reviews)

## Rationale

String data is one of the most important features in any programming language. Because it represents the language that humans write and read, so much code is dedicated to translating data to and from strings.

For the D language, translating data to strings currently requires explicitly using a library function such as
`std.format.format` or `std.conv.text`, or even C's `sprintf` function, and
in general results in syntax that is difficult to read or write. Mismatches of
format specifiers can be a problem for printf-style formatting. For `text`
style formatting, frequent quotation marks and commas can distract from the
intended result (especially when the result contains quotes or commas), not to
mention any extra whitespace that is not part of the
argument list.

In addition, functions can benefit from a more detailed specification of
literal data vs. variable data. In some cases, one can avoid needlessly
allocating memory, or having to parse a "format" specification to understand
the parameters. The user can write a string literal interleaving data to form
the desired appearance, and the result is passed as individual expressions to a
receiving function.

This DIP proposes to cover both cases with a single
construct.

## Prior Work

* Interpolated strings have been implemented and well-received in many languages.
For many such examples, see [String Interpolation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/String_interpolation).
* [DIP1027](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/master/DIPs/rejected/DIP1027.md)
* [C#'s implementation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/tokens/interpolated#compilation-of-interpolated-strings) which returns a formattable object that user functions can use
* [Javascript's implementation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals) which passes `string[], args...` to a builder function very similarly to this proposal
* Jason Helson submitted a DIP [String Syntax for Compile-Time Sequences](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/pull/140).
* [Jonathan Marler's Interpolated Strings](http://github.com/dlang/dmd/pull/7988)
* [Lisp and Scheme Quasi-quoted literals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lisp_(programming_language)#Self-evaluating_forms_and_quoting)

## Description

A string interpolation tuple literal, as defined below, allows one to interleave
non-string data inside a string literal. A string interpolation tuple literal,
as defined below, allows one to interleave non-string data inside a string
literal. One can include any expression surrounded by `${` and `}` as part of a
string literal, and the entire literal is either translated by the language into
a string or provided directly to a function for processing.

The primary use case is to employ the literal in place of a string-yielding expression:

```D
void foo(string s);

foo(i"Hello, my name is ${name} and I am ${age} years old.");

string s = i"${var1} + ${var2} = ${var1 + var2}";
```

The literal in the call to `foo` is translated directly to a compatible string and passed into
the function, and the literal used to inialize `s` is assigned to the string variable. The library takes care of the
translation in both cases and provides a "best effort" attempt to translate any expression
into character data.

The second use case is for functions which can process the data without needing a string translation. For example:

```D
writeln(i"I ate ${apples} apples and ${bananas} bananas totalling ${apples + bananas} fruit.");
```

is rewritten as:

```D
writeln(interp!"I ate "(), apples, interp!" apples and "(), bananas, interp!" bananas totalling "(),
        apples + bananas, interp!" fruit."());
```

The `interp` template is defined by the D runtime library as follows:

```D
struct interp(string s) // duplicated for wstring and dstring
{
    static string toString() { return s; }
}
```
An instance of an `interp` struct is defined as an `InterpolationLiteral`.

### Definition of the literal syntax

An interpolation string tuple literal starts as a special string token,
`InterpolatedString` added as a new `PrimaryExpression`, which starts with an
`i` prefix and is followed by a specialized string literal. The string
literal portion can be equivalent to one of `WysiwygString`,
`AlternateWysiwygString`, `DoubleQuotedString`, or `TokenString`. An interpolation sequence can
appear within the delimiters of each type of string. The following
grammar is added to the specification:

```diff
PrimaryExpression:
    Identifier
    . Identifier
    TemplateInstance
    . TemplateInstance
    this
    super
    null
    true
    false
    $
    IntegerLiteral
    FloatLiteral
    CharacterLiteral
    StringLiterals
+   InterpolatedString
    ArrayLiteral
    AssocArrayLiteral
    FunctionLiteral
    AssertExpression
    MixinExpression
    ImportExpression
    NewExpressionWithArgs
    FundamentalType . Identifier
    FundamentalType ( ArgumentListopt )
    TypeCtor ( Type ) . Identifier
    TypeCtor ( Type ) ( ArgumentListopt )
    Typeof
    TypeidExpression
    IsExpression
    ( Expression )
    SpecialKeyword
    TraitsExpression

+InterpolatedString:
+    InterpolatedDoubleQuotedString
+    InterpolatedWysiwygString
+    InterpolatedAlternateWysiwygString
+    InterpolatedTokenString
+
+InterpolatedDoubleQuotedString:
+    i" InterpolatedDoubleQuotedCharacters " StringPostfix[opt]
+
+InterpolatedDoubleQuotedCharacters:
+    InterpolatedDoubleQuotedCharacter InterpolatedDoubleQuotedCharacters
+
+InterpolatedDoubleQuotedCharacter:
+    Character
+    InterpolationSequence
+    InterpolationEscapeSequence
+    EndOfLine
+
+InterpolationEscapeSequence:
+    \$
+    EscapeSequence
+
+InterpolatedWysiwygString:
+    ir" InterpolatedWysiwygCharacters " StringPostfix[opt]
+
+InterpolatedAlternateWysiwygString:
+    i` InterpolatedWysiwygCharacters ` StringPostfix[opt]
+
+InterpolatedWysiwygCharacters:
+    InterpolatedWysiwygCharacter
+    InterpolatedWysiwygCharacter InterpolatedWysiwygCharacters
+
+InterpolatedWysiwygCharacters:
+    Character
+    InterpolationSequence
+    EndOfLine
+
+InterpolatedTokenString:
+    iq{ InterpolatedTokens }
+
+InterpolatedTokens:
+    InterpolatedToken
+    InterpolatedToken InterpolatedTokens
+
+InterpolatedToken:
+    InterpolationSequence
+    Token
+
+InterpolationSequence:
+    ${ AssignExpression }
```

Some examples:

```D
int visits = 42;
string name = "Walter";

string post(int v)
{
    if(v >= 10 && v <20) return "th";
    switch(v % 10) {
    case 1:
       return "st";
    case 2:
       return "nd";
    case 3:
       return "rd";
    default:
       return "th";
    }
}

auto msg1 = i"Hello, ${name}, this is your ${visits}${post(visits)} time visiting";
auto msg2 = ir"Hello, ${name}, this is your ${visits}${post(visits)} time visiting";
auto msg3 = i`Hello, ${name}, this is your ${visits}${post(visits)} time visiting`;
auto msg3 = q{Hello, ${name}, this is your ${visits}${post(visits)} time visiting};

dstring msg4 = i"Hello, ${name}, this is your ${visits}${post(visits)} time visiting"d;

float amount = 6.50;

// dollar signs not followed by an open brace are part of the literal.
writeln(i"You currently have $${amount} in your account");

enum fieldname = "foo";
mixin(i`auto x = T.${fieldname} ~ "foobar";`);

mixin(iq{ void baz(T[] arr) {
   if(arr.length > 0) {
      arr[$-1].${fieldname} ~= "foobar"; // note dollar sign without brace is passed as-is
   }
}
});

auto convoluted = i"${ir"`${"{"}`"}"; // nested string interpolations work.
assert(convoluted == "`{`");

```

The `InterpolationSequence` can be escaped only in a `DoubleQuotedString` literal via the `InterplationEscapeSequence`. Example:

```D
string name = "Walter";
writeln(i"The result of \${name} is ${name}");
// The result of ${name} is Walter
```

All other literal types do not allow escapes (as is normally the case for the original string types they are based on).

This DIP does not specify any requirements for escaping inside an
`InterpolationSequence` for double quoted interpolation string literals. It is our belief that no escape
sequences are necessary for the lexer and parser to work properly. If questions
arise surrounding this part of the DIP, we will address those in further
revisions.

The DIP authors feel the grammar above is correct, but do not want potential grammar issues to
distract from the overall thrust of the DIP. If any arise, we
are confident a solution exists, as D's `TokenString` provides many of the same
features. In the event the grammar has unresolvable problems, we are willing to
restrict the syntax to something that is workable.

Note that we chose the sequence `${expr}` to avoid duplicating standard uses of symbols inside strings (using just '$' alone would trigger a lot of unintentional usage, considering its use as a denomination specifier, or as a substitute for array length for mixin code). In the previous DIP 1027, the community coalesced around '$' as the prefix for an interpolation. We are open to alternative mechanisms (many different languages provide examples to draw from).

### Compiler implementation

The compiler will lex and parse the string literal into a sequence of expressions. The expressions will consist of `InterpolationLiteral` expressions and interpolated expressions from the `InterpolationSequence` items. The sequence will ALWAYS begin and end with an `InterpolationLiteral`, even if the string parameter is empty. This is to allow for function overloading and introspection. The sequence will also be identified internally by the compiler so the original `InterpolationString` can be easily rewritten if necessary (see below).

We will define a 'match' as the case when an `InterpolationString` is used in a parameter list, and the resulting expansion sequence as defined above is a match based on the existing compiler rules for matching function or template overloads.

If the `InterpolationString` is a match, then the sequence of expressions is left as-is, with no further attempt to rewrite the sequence.

In the case where it does not match, the `InterpolationString` will be rewritten as a call to a druntime library function named `idup`. This function will be strictly identified so as not to be overridable by user code. The `idup` function will be passed the sequence of expressions, and the result of the `idup` function will be a `string`, `wstring`, or `dstring` depending on the type of the literal. The resulting memory will be properly null-terminated for usage in C calls, though the null character will not be part of the returned string.

If the call to `idup` does not compile, or the result of `idup` does not match its usage (for example passing the interpolated string result into an `int`), no further rewrite is attempted, and an error is issued.

If multiple `InterpolationString` tokens are used in a parameter list, the call must match for the resulting expansion of all `InterpolationString` tokens, or the entire expression will fail to match. This is to avoid pathological cases where 2^n solutions are tried. To provide partial matching, an explicit call to `idup` must be used.

### Library implementation

The library will define the `interp` struct as listed above in module `object`.

The library will define an `idup` overload in module `object` as accepting a sequence of parameters where the first parameter must be an `InterpolationLiteral`. The function will convert the entire sequence to a GC-allocated string of the encoding type of the first parameter, where all expressions that are not `InterpolationLiteral` are translated into equivalent strings in one of the following ways:

1. If the type is a basic type, an appropriate druntime function that converts the value into a string will be called.
2. If the type is an enum, it will be translated to the enum name for that value. If no enum name matches, then an appropriate display of the value as the enum's base type with the prefix "cast(EnumType)" prepended.
3. If the type is an array, it will be translated to '[' `elem` ', ' `elem` ', ' ... ']', where `elem` is a recursive translation of each element.
4. If the type is an associative array, it will be translated to '[' `key` ': ' `value` ', ' `key` ': ' `value` ', ' ... ']', where `key` and `value` are recursive translations of each key and value of the associative array.
5. If the type is a struct, class or interface, and the type defines a member function or (in the case of struct) field `toString`, which either yields a string or can be used to construct a string via a provided delegate, that member is used.
6. If the type is a struct without a suitable `toString` member, it is converted to its `.stringof` type name, followed by '(', and its members are translated recursively, followed by a trailing ')’.
7. If the type is a class or interface without a suitable `toString` member function, the `.stringof` name of the class/interface is used followed by '<', the hex address of the interface/object, and then '>'.

In all cases, the exact definition of the translation should be in the language spec so users can depend on the resulting transformation never changing. The complete specification of these translations is left up to the eventual implementors and language maintainers. Any variation of output style/locale must be handled by user-defined functions that accept the sequence directly (see the next section).

### Overloading for interpolation

User code may overload a function for interpolation by accepting as parameters the `InterpolationString` sequence. The expected mechanism is to accept a vararg template parameter list, and either the ability to process the entire list without template constraints in a "best effort" fashion, or the use of template constraints to verify that the first parameter is an interpolation literal.

Because the `interp` template type will provide a `toString` member, it will pass properly to functions such as `writeln` or `text` and work as expected without any changes to the existing functions.

Functions which accept an appropriate string type will work with string interpolation literals due to the rewrite by the compiler to the `idup` call.

As an example, consider a mysql library:

```D
// existing overload for prepared statements
ResultSeq mysql_query(Args...)(string query, Args params) { ... }

// proposed overload
ResultSeq mysql_query(Args...)(Args args) if (Args.length > 0 && isInstanceOf!(interp, Args[0])) { ... }

// existing call
mysql_query("select * from foo where id = ? and val > ?", obj.id, minval);

// proposed call
mysql_query(i"select * from foo where id = ${obj.id} and val > ${minval}");
```

In the above example, the mysql library can add an overload that handles inline parameters and provides a call that is free of sql injection attacks, but reads much more intuitively. It may even be used without ever having to allocate the SQL statement on the GC heap. Consider an update statement where many parameters are provided:

```D
// existing
mysql_exec("update foo set name = ?, val = ?, phone = ?, flag = ? where id = ?", obj.name, obj.val + 5, extractPhone(obj), obj.item == 6, obj.id);

// proposed
mysql_exec(i"update foo set name = ${obj.name}, val = ${obj.val + 5}, phone = ${extractPhone(obj)}, flag = ${obj.item == 6} where id = ${obj.id}");
```

Not only is the latter easier to read, write, and understand, but the statement itself includes no need for superfluous placeholders, because the library handles the translation.

#### Concatenation

Concatenation of two interpolation strings using the `~` operator will result in `idup` being called on both literals, and the result concatenated together. This DIP allows for (and recommends) the compiler to shortcut this and pass both sequences to the same `idup` call. However, this may be considered an optimization that is not necesssary for the feature to exist.

To pass two sequential interpolation strings to a function that accepts interpolation strings, concatenation is not needed&#8212;separating the string literals by a comma will suffice. This allows a single interpolation string to be split into multiple lines. One may also use string literal types that allow multi-line strings.

### A string interpolation sequence is NOT a value tuple

A string interpolation sequence does not result in a value tuple. It can bind to a parameter list, but it does not have a type by itself.

In particular, the following shall be valid:

```D
string s = "Hello";
int i = 5;

// This gets the length of the resulting string, not the length of the sequence.
assert(i"${s}, ${i}".length == 8);

// auto variables cannot be assigned to a interpolation sequence
auto x = i"${i} + ${i} == ${i + i}";
static assert(is(typeof(x) == string));
```

### Error reporting

With proper library definitions, if usage of a string interpolation is an error, this DIP does not specify the language of the error condition. It is our preference that the resulting error of the `idup` call is emitted instead of the failed sequence match.

If the `interp` template or the `idup` overloads are missing, the compiler should note this instead of flagging an error with the user's code.

In BetterC mode, the `idup` function should be unavailable as it requires the GC, and usage of string interpolation literals that would normally use `idup` should be flagged as unavailable in BetterC. However, functions which accept `interp` literals will work in BetterC as long as the `interp` template is available.

### String first, specialization optional

Because the type `interp!"..."` is not implicitly convertible to any other type, existing functions that do not accept all types will not match usage of a string interpolation tuple literal. This design is intentional to trigger the implicit `idup` call whenever it is used for conventional string-accepting functions. In essence, a user expects this to be a string, first and foremost. A library function that accepts the string might want to be able to treat it differently, but until the library author opts-in, it should be usable as-is via the string conversion.

In addition, "Best effort" functions should work as if it were a sequence of "string-able" items, which makes inutitive sense to anyone calling them with a string literal. Functions such as `text` and `writeln` will work as expected.

### Format specifications

In the prior version of this DIP and in DIP1027, formatting was a central component of interpolation. What became clear as the prior version was reviewed was that the complexity of specifying format while transforming into a parameter sequence was not worth adding to the language. In particular, many applications of string interpolation did not fit well with format specifications (the sql example above being one of them), and the end result was something that seemed focused solely on `writef` and `printf` functions.

However, that does not mean this DIP cannot be used with format specifications. Even `writefln` could be adjusted to accept a string interpolation tuple. Because the `InterpolationLiteral` items are guaranteed to be literals, it is possible to embed formatting specifiers into them, directly preceeding the values they might format. For example, one would be able to make a call like this do what is expected:

```D
writefln(i"Hello, ${name}, your age in hex is %x${age}");
```

This is not necessarily better than a standard `writefln` call, but it shows that formatting is *possible* if one so desires.

### Interpolation literal strings available at compile time

Because the interpolation literals are available as compile-time parameters to the `interp` template, it is possible to perform some tasks at compile time that normally would require run-time processing.

For example, in the mysql function examples above, the SQL string generated for passing to the server can be generated completely at compile time. Format specifications could be verified at compile time as well (analogous to `writef!"spec"(args)` instead of `writef("spec", args)`).

### Limitations

String interpolation literals that are implicitly converted to strings require the library to be available and implemented properly. However, the `interp` shim has a simple definition, and can be used in any type of code, including BetterC.

Properly formatting floating point values with phobos/druntime currently requires libc to work. This DIP does not address this external dependency, but it is something to consider as a language feature. This also means that CTFE evaluation of a string interpolation that contains a floating point value will fail to compile. However, there isn't a language-accepted mechanism for this at the time of writing.

## Breaking Changes and Deprecations

Because `InterpolatedString` is a new token, no existing code is broken.

## Reference

## Copyright & License
Copyright (c) 2020, 2021 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Reviews

### Community Review Round 1

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/15537f9b36afa48f1c1cd57468e8c77f8f2499dd/DIPs/DIP1036.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/vwrbvacnuerasbphgtjy@forum.dlang.org)

[Feedback](https://forum.dlang.org/post/vpgemqdqgorsuzqbxazw@forum.dlang.org)

* Since the new syntax does not allow initialization/assignment, it's usage is limited and unintuitive, and the new syntax should be replaced with a template or a trait. One DIP author replied that attempts to use the new syntax that way will result in an informative error instructing the user to call `.idup`.
* The interface the new feature exposes is "hard to use correctly, and hard to use incorrectly" and should be withdrawn. One DIP author disagreed, saying that the interface is easy to use.
* `printf` should not comprise most of the feature's design considerations. One DIP author replied that it does not.
* The conversion of `spec` to a `compile-time NUL-terminated C string` should not be implemented. One DIP author replied whether or not this is useful is a jugement call.
* The syntax `${%d}bananas` is unintuitive. `${bananas:2f}` is better, as is Python's approach to format specifiers. A DIP author replied that the suggested syntax is syntactically ambiguous. The selected syntax came from DIP1027, but if an alternative, unambiguous syntax is preferred by the maintainers, the authors will modify this proposal.
* Format specifiers need to be "100% customizable". A DIP author replied that they are.
* The interpolated string struct should contain its own arguments; the proposed approach of rewriting  to `<interplationSpec>, arg1, arg2` is confusing and prohibits implementing functions which accept two interpolated string arguments. A DIP author replied that a single structure approach has issues with forawrding ref-ness, binding to aliases and lazy parameters, etc.
* The DIP does not provide a good motivation for automatically concatenating string literals to interpolated strings, especially given that automatic string concatenation was deprecated. A DIP author replied that this was copied from DIP1027; the formation of interpolation string tuples across multiple lines and multiple string types should be supported and implicit conversion does the job, but the authors are open to other ideas.
* The DIP does not address combining token strings to generate D code. A DIP author provided an example.
* Given that users want the ability to use interpolated string in assignment and initialization, the DIP should provide a good explanation as to why the compiler should not rewrite assignments to automatically use `.idup`. A DIP author replied that `.idup` is a convenience feature that is not tied to acceptance or rejection of the DIP, but the authors are open to such rewrites if the language maintainers require it.
* The DIP does not account for operator overloading on strings. A DIP author that the specific example given was not possible to support, but it can work with custom types.
* The fear of GC is not sufficient motivation for requiring users to call `.idup`. A DIP author replied that the motivation was not GC avoidance, but due to compatibility with a variety of use cases, such as `ref` parameters, types with no `toString` implementation, compile-time arguments, and more, and suggested the DIP should mention these cases explicitly.
* The DIP leaves unspecified the name of the interplation spec to be defined by DRuntime, but does specify the name `isInterpolationSpec`. This should also be unnamed. A DIP author replied that there must be a way to determine if a function has been given an interpolation spec and it must have a name. With this approach, the implementation has more discretion.
* The DIP explains `toFormatString` and `hasAllSpecs` in great detail; perhaps these should be optional like `.idup`, allowing the DIP to be simplified. A DIP author replied that `toFormatString` is "the only official way to fetch the spec text", and that `hasAllSpecs` is a mechanism to convert to `const(char)*` to which allowing access might not have been necessary.
* The optional `alias this` when all format specifiers are defined is complicated; perhaps an implementation-defined function, like `toFormatz`, can be added. A DIP author replied that this will not work; only the format specifier needs to be translated and such an approach would require passing through all the parameters.
* It's easy to write a wrapper around C functions like `printf`, but the support for implicit conversion to `immutable(char)*` is excessive. A DIP author agreed, saying the initial motivation was to retain DIP1027's ability to call C vararg functions without modifications, but the authors have since decided the requirement "does not carry its own weight".
* The grammar is incorrect, as `Expression` already exists. The DIP author agreed, saying the grammar has multiple issues that need to be corrected.
* Interpolated strings should work "out of the box" with `mixin` and not require `.idup`. A DIP author replied that this will be solved in the next DIP revision.
* The concatenation syntax of `i"" q{$a + $b}` should be simplified to `iq{$a + $b}`. The DIP authors agree.
* In the "Wrong-use in unrelated function", the example provided mentions the situation where a user rewrites code "as would be common in many other languages"; it is impossible "to constrain D based on what people expect from 'many other languages'". A DIP author replied the authors only were referring to how other languages handle string interpolation specifically, and that the next revision of the DIP will solve this in a "cleaner way".
* The DIP needs a much better rationale as to why it's preferable to DIP1027. A DIP author replied that the next revision will be "vastly different" from DIP1027, so it's a moot point.

### Community Review Round 2

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/344e00ee2d6683d61ee019d5ef6c1a0646570093/DIPs/DIP1036.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/uhueqnulcsskznsyuhwx@forum.dlang.org)

[Feedback](https://forum.dlang.org/post/bvrejaayzpgbykacxrxe@forum.dlang.org)

In addition to pointing out several typos and ambiguities, the reviewers provided the following actionable feedback:

* The DIP does not show what the `idup` function looks like. A DIP author provided the signature.
* A language maintainer noted that D is moving away from adding features that use the GC. A DIP author replied that the GC is only required when `idup` is used.
* The DIP should specify the error emitted when string interpolation is used erroneously. A DIP author agreed to do so.
* To the following three feedback items, a DIP author explained that functions like writeln, that have no limit on the types of arguments they accept and attempt to (make a "best effort" to) handle them all, will not trigger the `idup` rewrite:
   1. It isn't clear when `idup` and `interp` are called.
   2. How does triggering "the implicit `idup` call" when interpolation is "used for conventional string-accepting functions" fit in with overload resolution?
   3. What does "best effort" mean?
* The claim that review of DIP 1027 let to the conclusion that "the complexity of specifying format while transforming into a parameter sequence was not worth adding to the language" is not true, and this DIP is much more complicated. A DIP author disagreed, saying that thought this DIP may be more complicated to implement, it will be simpler to use.
* Allowing a comma between two interpoltation literals rather than requiring concatenation will have "weird consequences" for function overloading. A DIP author asked for examples of "weird consequences".
* The DIP should provide a detailed design of the feature to potentially reveal any fatal flaws, rather than leaving it up to implementors as specified in the Library implementation section. A DIP author replied that the authors are willing to write an implementation, but the implementation does not affect the proposal; they are "100% confident an implementation of `idup` is possible".
* The DIP does not specify how variadic parameters and lazy parameters are matched. The authors think varidic parameters should not match the expanded string, and expect lazy parameters to accet string interpolation literals in the same way non-lazy parameters would.
* The DIP should provide examples of both trivial and non-trivial overload matches which illustrate each step of the process. A DIP author agreed.
* When rewriting  `foo(i"a:${a}, ${b}.")`, a better alternative to the DIP's approach of `foo(Interp!"a:", a, Interp!", ", b, Interp!".")` would be `foo(Interp!"a:", Interp!typeof(a)(a), Interp!", ", Interp!typeof(b)(b), Interp!".")`. A DIP author disagreed, as this would add template bloat, it's not clear that `Interp!(typeof(a))(a)` would bring a benefit over `a`, and it removes the possibility for reference parameters.
* The type of interpolated string literal is a special case as it is explicitly described as not being an alias sequence, but behaves like when it can and behaves like a string when it can't; this is ripe for corner cases. A DIP author replied he cannot think of any corner cases and requested examples.
* An alternative implementation: allow the user specify the type of the interolated result, either a string (`i""` results in a call to `idup`), or a real `AliasSeq` (via `I`). A DIP author replied that such an approach was considered but rejected, as it would be too easy for the user to choose the least efficient option; automatic rewrites can take the most efficient approach in all cases.
* `InterpolatedString` should obey escaping rules of the kind of string literal it's derived from (`DoubleQuotedString`, `WysiwygString`, etc) with the same initial lexing logic, then interpolation sequeinces should be handled on the raw string after all unescaping. A DIP author responded with details on why the authors decided not to take this approach.
* The DIP proposes a feature that attempts to combine two distinct approaches to string inerpolation, a convenient one and a flexible one; these are fine as separate proposals, but the combined feature described here fails as it must "read the programmer's mind" in order to know when to use `idup` and when not to. The DIP author disagrees and suggests that, though there may be edge cases like the one provided by the reviewer, he believes they will be rare.
* The claim that `mysql` example in the DIP "provides a call that is free of sql injection attacks" requires substantiation, as such attacks are a critical problem. A DIP author explained how this claim is trivially true because the string must be known at compile time.
* `i""` becomes an interp sequence too easily; in order to interact with other language features in an inutitive manner, it should become a string immediately except in very specific circumstances that "leave absolutely no room for doubt".

## Addendum
The DIP authors chose to withdraw the DIP from consideration in deference [to an alternative proposal](https://github.com/John-Colvin/YAIDIP).