# Function Pointer and Delegate Parameters Inherit Attributes from Function

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1032                                                            |
| Review Count:   | 2                                                               |
| Author:         | Walter Bright walter@digitalmars.com                            |
| Implementation: |                                                                 |
| Status:         | Withdrawn                                                       |

## Abstract

When function parameters are declared as delegates or function pointers, any `@safe`, `pure`,
`nothrow`, and `@nogc` attributes that are attached to the function type are ignored.
This DIP proposes that any of these attributes attached to a function
become the defaults for delegate and function pointer types declared in the function's parameter list.


## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Prior Work](#prior-work)
* [Description](#description)
* [Breaking Changes and Deprecations](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations)
* [Reference](#reference)
* [Copyright & License](#copyright--license)
* [Reviews](#reviews)

## Rationale

Consider the code:

```d
@safe pure nothrow @nogc
int foo(int delegate() dg)
{
    return dg(); // Error
}
```

This fails because the delegate `dg` has none of `foo`'s attributes. The user
will need to write:
```d
@safe pure nothrow @nogc
int foo(int delegate() @safe pure nothrow @nogc dg)
{
    return dg(); // No error
}
```

The following also compiles without error:
```d
@safe pure nothrow @nogc
{
    alias dg_t = int delegate();

    int foo(dg_t dg)
    {
        return dg(); // No error
    }
}
```

demonstrating that the `dg_t` declaration is picking up attributes that
are in scope.

Having the user repeat these attributes in the parameter declaration is
both surprising and burdensome. It is even more inconvenient because when a delegate
is passed to a function, most of the time it is so the function can call it,
but the function cannot call it if it does not have at least the set of
`@safe`, `pure`, `nothrow`, and `@nogc` attributes that the function has.

Passing delegates to functions is a key feature of D and underpins a number of
coding patterns. Making them easier to use by eliminating the need for a clutter
of attribute annotations will be welcome and will lower the barrier to adding
annotations to functions in the first place.

A further reason is that the `lazy` function parameter attribute is underspecified
and is a constant complication in the language specification. With this DIP, `lazy`
can move towards being defined in terms of an equivalent delegate parameter,
thereby simplifying the language by improving consistency.

This DIP proposes that delegate and function pointer parameters default to having
the same combination of the four aforementioned attributes as the function which
defines the parameter list.

## Prior Work

None known.


## Description

Function pointer and delegate types defined in the function parameter list default
to the attributes of the function type that defines that parameter list.
With this change, the following will compile without error:
```d
@safe pure nothrow @nogc
int foo(int delegate() dg, int function() fp)
{
    return dg() + fp();
}
```


## Breaking Changes and Deprecations

It is possible that a parameter declaration may require that a delegate or function pointer
parameter have fewer attributes than the function itself. This would only be possible in the
following cases:

1. delegate or function pointer was never called, but was ignored or simply stored elsewhere.
2. the function is `nothrow` but the delegate throws, and the function wraps the call to the delegate in a try-catch block
3. the function is `pure` but the delegate is impure, and called only within a `debug` block
4. the function is `safe` but the delegate is `system`, and is called within a `trusted` block


Such can be accomplished by declaring the parameter type elsewhere:

```d
alias dg_t = void delegate() dg_t;
alias fp_t = void function() fp_t;

dg_t global_dg;
fp_t global_fp;

@safe pure nothrow @nogc
void foo(dg_t dg, fp_t fp)
{
    global_dg = dg;
    global_fp = fp;
}
```

Because of possible code breakage, this feature will initially be available only via
the `-preview=attrdelegate` compiler switch.

## Reference

An alternative approach [was proposed](https://forum.dlang.org/post/mailman.2553.1586000429.31109.digitalmars-d@puremagic.com) during the community review round and [subsequently clarified](https://forum.dlang.org/post/rgifhwdmvsrfxbqqagnp@forum.dlang.org). The DIP [author responded](https://forum.dlang.org/post/rfq8sc$t6r$1@digitalmars.com).

## Copyright & License
Copyright (c) 2020 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Reviews
### Community Review Round 1

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/0c99bd854302ade3e6833080410e9050fddec346/DIPs/DIP1032.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/ovllntpiebixbtrbiuxj@forum.dlang.org)

[Feedback](https://forum.dlang.org/post/tkosvxedhztfjxsxtkdm@forum.dlang.org)

The following points were raised in the feedback thread:

* two reviewers noted that this proposal will cause significant breakage and suggested it should be opt-in. Each provided a different approach.

    Option 1: allow `auto` on delegate parameters
    ```d
    @safe pure nothrow @nogc
    int foo(int delegate() auto dg, int function() auto fp)
    ```
    Option 2: add a new `@inherit` attribute for parameters
    ```d
    @safe pure nothrow @nogc
    int foo(int delegate() @inherit dg, int function() @inherit fp)
    ```
* the DIP does not discuss templates: what happens when function attributes are inferred but the template doesn't actually call the delegate or function pointer parameter? The DIP author replied that templates do not currently infer attributes for delegates and this DIP does not propose changing that behavior.
* the proposed feature, if accepted at all, should be limited to `lazy` parameters.
* the potential for breaking changes has been oversimplified.
* this would prohibit passing e.g., `@system` delegates to `@safe` constructors or functions, so should be opt-in, though it's not clear to the reviewer if a new attribute is warrented.

### Final Review

[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/5675676cfb21a69cfd6eda033c53356ee2275fd1/DIPs/DIP1032.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/ubcwhqxyjizccoekpgbw@forum.dlang.org)

[Feedback](https://forum.dlang.org/post/axjajqhksecqdsercgmy@forum.dlang.org)

There was little activity in the discussion thread and only one review in the feedback thread. The feedback raised the following issues:

* The DIP adds nothing new, simply moving a restriction from one place to another, and it does so inconsistenly and incompletely.
* Some code that does not compile now would compile with this change, but some that does compile now would break.
* The DIP trades readability for writeability. The DIP author suggests writeability is important: "people don't like writing attribute soup".
* As an example of real-world code, Phobos does not exhibit issues this DIP proposes to solve. The DIP author replied that he had encountered compiler errors with Phobos in the past when delegates were unattributed, so he fixed them. Therefore, it's no surprise that Phobos does not exhibit those issues.
* The real problem is that functions that accept delegates have to be unattributed if the delegate can't be templated. Instead of allowing the deleage parameter to pick up a function's attributes, it should be the other way around.

## Addendum
The DIP author chose to withdraw the DIP from consideration prior to the formal assessment. The potential for code breakage was too high and the utility of the feature too low to justify the change.