# Providing more selective control over contracts

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | DIP1006                                                         |
| Review Count:   | 2 [Most Recent]                                                 |
| Author:         | Mathias Lang - mathias.lang@sociomantic.com                     |
| Implementation: | None                                                            |
| Status:         | Superseded                                                      |

[Most Recent]: https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/ef031a229629f6995e4d1b885451113b10bfecf7/DIPs/DIP1006.md

## Abstract

A proposal to expose a way to selectively disable some of D's contract features
(invariant, `in` / `out` and `assert`).


### Links

Limited D1 implementation, used by Sociomantic: https://github.com/dlang/dmd/pull/6347


## Description

Add a command-line switch, named `-contracts` in this proposal, which takes 4 possible values:

- `all`: the default, present for completeness and scripts, so one can just append it to a generated command line to enable all contract checks.
- `noinvariant`: Disable implicit `invariant` calls, but leave in function `in` / `out` contracts and `assert`.
- `assert`: Disable `invariant` blocks and `in` / `out` contracts, but leave `assert` in.
- `none`: Disable all `invariant`, `in` and `out` contracts, and `assert`.

Note that the `noinvariant` value only disables implicit calls to `invariant`. Explicit calls can only be disabled by disabling `assert`.


### Rationale

#### Prelude on contracts

Under the broad name "Contracts", we regroup four D features: `assert`, `in` contracts, `out` contracts and `invariant`.
Contracts in D are a means to do sanity checking. A contract that fails is a sign of faulty logic in the code.
Since contracts should never fail, the currently advertised approach for D programmers is to use them during development,
then deploy a `-release` build of the application for maximum performance.

Contracts naturally fit in a hierarchy, where `assert` is the most basic block (being used by others),
and `invariant` is meant for expensive sanity checking. `in` and `out` contracts are located in between.

#### Cost of contracts

`assert` and `in` / `out` contracts follow a pay-for-what-you-use approach: an `assert` which is never executed is free,
and a `in` or `out` contract on a function that is never called is also free of runtime overhead.

`invariant`s stand out in that regard: they can be used on a pay-for-what-you-use basis, by using `assert(object)` (or `assert(this)`),
but they are also implicitly called twice on every `public` and `protected` class method call.
The call itself is not direct: the compiler inserts a call to `_d_invariant`, [which can be found in druntime](https://github.com/dlang/druntime/blob/v2.072.0/src/rt/invariant.d).
The code, being very simple, results in the class hierarchy being traversed completely twice (no caching is done)
for every call, even for classes which do not define any invariant.

Profiling some real-time applications within Sociomantic showed that `_d_invariant` was the most expensive call in the application.
Affected applications were using few or no invariants, but since Sociomantic code is mostly written in an OOP style,
simply disabling invariants (with no other optimization) led to 20% more throughput.

#### Issues with the current approach

Testing can be complete and it is not rare to miss a scenario that can show up any time in a production setting.
In such a case, having a contract not failing where it should can lead to higher costs than the one induced by a crash of the application.
Examples of such a case include critical data corruption and unexpected monetary spending.

For this reason, developers are often wary of disabling such safety features, even in production, as long as the performance cost is acceptable.
What can be viewed as an acceptable performance cost is up to the end user and the code base.
Any OOP-intensive code will want to get rid of `invariant` as a first step, while more function-oriented code might be more interested in disabling `in` / `out`.

#### Relationship with `-release` and `-debug`

In DMD, `-debug` just mean enabling `debug` blocks, so there is no overlap with `-contracts`'s proposed functionality.
On the other hand, `-release` disables all aforementioned contracts, and, in addition, disables "switch errors"
(compiler-generated `default` case in a switch statement are turned into HLT instruction instead of throwing a `SwitchError`).
As a result, using `-contracts` with `-release` is equivalent to just using `-release`.

#### Considered alternatives

The 4 values available to the user are voluntarily simple and hierarchical. It makes little sense to allow any contracts without enabling asserts.
It would be feasible to allow `invariant` without `in` and `out` contracts, or only `out` contracts, only `in` contracts, or some other combination.
Since providing all combinations would increase complexity, but doesn't yet provide an obvious advantage, it was left out of this proposal (but can be subject to another one).

While a higher granularity is not recommended by the DIP author, it was one of the most discussed points on the review thread,
with several people expression an interest in the feature.

Since this proposal was heavily motivated by the cost of invariants, an obvious alternative is to reduce said cost.
However, the cost of having `invariant` enabled will never be null for builds that do not use invariants at all, which is the real motivation for this feature.

Finally, this functionality is already implemented in LDC via `-enable-invariants={0,1}`.
Standardizing it would simplify users' lives and allow tooling that deals with multiple compilers (e.g. `dub`, IDEs...) to provide this option.

### Breaking changes / deprecation process

Since this behavior is entirely opt-in, no breakage is expected.

### Implementation difficulty

The reference front-end already segments the affected features into separate flags, hence the implementation should be trivial.

## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2016 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Review

_This DIP was submitted and the review process initiated prior to the procedural changes implemented [in the PROCEDURE document](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/commits/master/PROCEDURE.md) on March 5, 2018. The only round of Preliminary Review (known as Community Review under the revised procedure) began on April 12, 2017. The Formal Review, which consisted of a community review followed by the Language Maintainers' review (subsequently divided into two review rounds under the revised procedure: Final Review and Formal Assessment) began on September 15, 2017. The previous procedure called for a summary only for the latter half of the Formal Review round to provide a record of the Language Maintainers' decision._

[Preliminary Review Round 1](http://forum.dlang.org/post/rsafosvkhxddkxptaziy@forum.dlang.org).

### Formal Review
[Reviewed Version](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/ef031a229629f6995e4d1b885451113b10bfecf7/DIPs/DIP1006.md)

[Discussion](https://forum.dlang.org/post/rolxkrmfpvygivyumuec@forum.dlang.org)

The Language Maintainers agreed with the intent of the proposal, but disagreed with the proposed implementation. They felt the proposed compiler switch, `-contracts`, was too narrow and would be better implemented as a switch that could be applied more broadly to enable and disable more language features. Revisions to the DIP were requested to reflect such an implementation. Before the revision was completed, the proposal was superseded by the `-check` compiler switch [released in DMD 2.084.0](https://dlang.org/changelog/2.084.0.html#check-switch).



