# Exceptions and @nogc

| Field           | Value                                                       |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1008                                                        |
| Review Count:   | 1 [Most Recent]                                             |
| Author:         | Walter Bright - walter@digitalmars.com                      |
| Implementation: | [PR 6681]                                                   |
| Status:         | Postponed                                                   |

[Most Recent]: https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/7e24193032ef22c26696f23e68cf82432d9de9b0/DIPs/DIP1008.md
[PR 6681]: https://github.com/dlang/dmd/pull/6681

## Abstract

A proposal for allowing exceptions to be allocated and thrown in `@nogc` code just as they are, otherwise via automated refcounting.

### Links

Previous discussions can be found in the following threads in the General forum:

[Exceptions in @nogc code](http://forum.dlang.org/thread/oboaa2$17oa$1@digitalmars.com?page=1)

[Proposal 2: Exceptions and @nogc](http://forum.dlang.org/thread/occ9kk$24va$1@digitalmars.com?page=1)

## Description

Make `Throwable` optionally refcounted. Add a field `_refcount` which
is `!=0` when it is a refcounted instance. The number of parents of
a refcounted `Throwable` is `_refcount+1`. This member is private and only accessible via the `@system` member function `refcount()`, to prevent its use in `@safe` code.

The only place a refcounted `Throwable` is ever created is when the following statement is in the user code:

    throw new E(string);

where E is `Throwable` or derived from `Throwable`. Instead of calling the usual `_d_newclass()` to allocate `E` on the GC heap, it will call the new function `_d_newThrowable()` which will allocate `E` and intialize it for refcounting.

When the exception is thrown, either `_d_throwc()` or `_d_throwdwarf()` gets called, which is where druntime takes over. The refcount is incremented in these functions, usually from 1 to 2.

The thrown object will then wind up either in a catch statement, or in the `next` linked list of thrown exceptions in flight.

A catch variable `e` as in:

    catch (E e)
    {
        ...
    }

becomes a RAII object, meaning that it is destroyed at the closing `}`. Such destruction is done by calling:

    _d_delThrowable(e);

which will test `e._refcount` to see if it is a refcounted object. If not, it does nothing. If it is, the refcount is decremented, and if it hits one then `e`'s destructor is called, followed by freeing the memory used by `e`.

In catch blocks, `e` is regarded as `scope` so that it cannot escape the
catch block. As a special case, if `e` is thrown in the catch block as:

    throw e;

then `e` can escape. This works because, as mentioned before, `_d_throwc()` or `_d_throwdwarf()` will increment the reference count.

The destructor for `Throwable` will, if the refcount is 1, call `_d_delThrowable(e.next)`, i.e. on the head of the chained list of exceptions. This means that the chained list can be a mixed collection of refcounted and non-refcounted Throwables, although the refcounted ones can only be freed when their antecedent gets reaped by whatever means.

The chained list must be `protected` so it cannot be altered or escaped by user code.

### Rationale

Exceptions are assumed to be GC-collected by the EH design, in that no
attempt is made to control copies or lifetimes. This dependency is not
a performance issue, as exceptions are presumed to be slow.

The issue is it impairs use of `@nogc` on any code that throws exceptions, and prevents building D programs that do not link in the GC runtime.

To fix this, the allocation and destruction of the exception objects
must be completely controlled. The result of this should be no leaking memory, no need to link in the GC, and memory safety. GC, stack, and refcounted exception objects can coexist in the same
program.

### Breaking changes

This will break an unknown amount of existing code.

Breakage will come in the form of:

1. Leaking `Exception` objects from catch clauses (caught by
the compiler)

2. Disallowing `Exception` objects with postblit fields.

3. Catch objects being `scope` will cause problems in that
everything done with those objects will also have to be `scope`.
The most likely problem will be printing the objects, which
relies on `Object.toString()`, which is not `scope`. One possible
solution is to force `Throwable.toString()` to be `scope`, which
will likely cause minimal disruption. Of course, compiling
with **-dip1000** will disable such checking and can work in
the interim. Code that needs to leak the thrown exception object
can clone the object.

## Copyright & License

Copyright (c) 2016 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## Review

[Preliminary Review Round 1](http://forum.dlang.org/thread/blvfxcbfzoyxowsfzlhn@forum.dlang.org)

## Addendum
This DIP was postponed at the request of the author.