# Symbol Representation

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            | 1045                                                            |
| Author:         | Richard (Rikki) Andrew Cattermole (firstname@lastname.co.nz)    |
| Implementation: |                                                                 |
| Status:         | Formal Assessment -- Postponed                                  |

## Abstract

Symbols are the ultimate representation of native programming language features. Inaccurate representation of these symbols at the compiler or language level can lead to linkage failures. Such issues can be a significant source of frustration and may even lead to the perception that solutions are unattainable. The purpose of this DIP is to address and rectify common shared library linking errors across various platforms and targets.

## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Prior Work](#prior-work)
* [Description](#description)
* [Breaking Changes and Deprecations](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations)
* [Reference](#reference)
* [Glossary](#glossary)
* [Copyright & License](#copyright--license)
* [Reviews](#reviews)

## Rationale

It can be frustrating for D users to encounter challenges arising from the lack of support for common use cases and the absence of viable workarounds, particularly in the context of linker errors. For those unfamiliar with linkers, understanding and resolving these errors can be daunting, often leading to requests for assistance.

A significant portion of symbol representation issues in D remains obscured when the language's use is confined to static libraries and standalone executables. However, such a configuration does not cater to the diverse needs and preferences of all users. There is a demand for more flexible binary configurations, such as those involving shared libraries.

Use cases like integrating plugins into D, creating D plugins for other languages, or developing replaceable binaries exemplify the scenarios where shared libraries involving D are beneficial. To ensure D's consistency and ease of use, it is crucial to enhance the language's approach to symbol representation.

The primary focus should be on the module level. Understanding whether a module is within or external to the current binary is key to resolving many linker issues by default. This fundamental knowledge sets the stage for further improvements and modifications.

## Prior Work

In 2016, Benjamin Thaut delivered a presentation at DConf titled "[D's Import and Export Business](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-vEmOc-WphY)" addressing a proposal to improve the D programming language, specifically focusing on the export and shared library functionalities.

While this DIP does not directly derive from Thaut's proposal and diverges from discussing specific implementation details, it arrives at a similar conclusion regarding the role of `export`. Specifically, it recognizes that, for effective use of positive annotation in D, `export` should not function merely as a visibility modifier.

A notable distinction from Thaut's approach is his suggestion to set the `dllimport` switch to 'all' as a method of indicating that a symbol is in DllImport mode. However, based on the D community's extensive experience with shared libraries in the ensuing years, it has become apparent that this approach frequently leads to linker errors. Therefore, a more nuanced and finer-grained solution is required to address these issues effectively.

## Description

### Cornerstone Changes

This section outlines crucial changes for future updates to ensure error-free compilation.

1. __External Import Path Switch__: A new compiler flag, `-extI`, is introduced. Functioning analogously to the `-I` switch, this flag designates modules as external to the binary currently being compiled. Ideally, build managers should automate this process, using knowledge of dependencies to substitute `-I` with `-extI` for modules associated with shared libraries.
2. __Out-of-Binary Modules__: Modules identified as external (via the `-extI` switch) will have an implicit `extern` attribute applied to all non-templated scopes.
3. __Symbol Import:__ To import a symbol in DllImport mode, annotation with both `export` and `extern` is required. The presence or absence of a function body in this context is inconsequential.

The following sections consider the reliability of templates when linking with shared libraries, the D interface generator, different export annotations, and inlining.

### Reliability of Templates

Templates can lead to linkage failures due to assumptions about template instantiations. Therefore, it is important to ensure that symbols derived from templates are not automatically eligible for export or placed into DllImport mode. Instead, these symbols should be re-instantiated when identified as external to the binary and placed into the target binary with the appropriate duplication flags set. This requires the application of the external import path switch on a per-module basis.

To optimize code generation, compilers may adopt a 'pinning' strategy. A template instantiation is considered 'pinned' if it is referenced by a non-templated symbol within the same module of its declaration. This pinning extends to variable declarations, including global variables, that are not encapsulated within a template, as well as to function parameters and return types.

Once a template and its associated symbols are pinned, the compiler has the discretion to omit code generation for these symbols when they are external to the binary. In such cases, the compiler should honor the designated exportation and DllImport symbol modes, ensuring efficient and error-free linkage.

### D Interface Generator

The D interface generator, an exportation tool provided by the D compiler, facilitates the creation of `.di` files by omitting symbol bodies from a D file. This tool is particularly useful when used alongside the C parser (ImportC) for generating bindings to C libraries.  However, a notable limitation of the current implementation is its inability to accurately respect symbol modes during exportation.

To address this, the following modifications are proposed:

1. The generator should not automatically add the `extern` attribute to symbols.
2. The generator may add the `export` attribute to all non-templated scopes, but only if the visibility override switch is set to export the specific module.

These adjustments are intended to work in conjunction with the cornerstone changes previously outlined. Consequently, they ensure that:

* For a codebase marked with `export`, the `.di` generator refrains from introducing additional extern attributes.
* The resulting `.di` file can be used with the standard import path switch `-I` for static libraries or object files.
* Alternatively, the `.di` file can be applied with the external import path switch `-extI` when dealing with shared library dependencies.

### Symbol Exportation Mode Approaches

Each symbol can exist in one of three different modes: Internal, DllExport, and DllImport.

1. __Internal Mode__: This is the default mode for symbols. An internal symbol can be accessed by other symbols within the same binary, regardless of the module in which it is defined.
2. __DllExport Mode__: When set, this mode indicates that a symbol should be accessible not only within its own binary but also to external binaries. This is essential for compiling symbols intended for use across different binaries.
3. __DllImport Mode__: This mode informs the compiler that the symbol is external to the current binary. The compiler, therefore, generates code to allow access to this symbol at runtime.

The strategies for determining the appropriate mode for a symbol are as follows:

* __Positive Annotation Using `export`__: This method represents the default behavior of the D compiler, where the `export` keyword is used to explicitly mark symbols for exportation.
* __Negative Annotation Using Visibility Override Switch__: By default, symbols not annotated with `export` are not exported. The visibility override switch can be employed to reverse this default behavior, forcing all symbols to be exported. This is particularly useful for libraries that have not been explicitly marked with `export` but need their symbols exported.
* __Corner Case Annotation for Multi-step Builds__: This is a specialized notation for scenarios requiring a determination of whether a symbol is Internal or DllImport, depending on the build step. It is useful in multi-step build processes presenting intricate or conflicting symbol modes.

#### Export Annotation

The `export` attribute is enhanced with the capability to take an identifier as a parameter. This identifier is interpreted as a version, requiring the following grammar change:

```diff
VisibilityAttribute:
-   export

Attribute:
+   export
+   export ( Identifier )
```

The functionality of this parameter depends on whether the identifier is active (activated by `-version=ident`). When active, the symbol is placed in internal mode, unless it is being compiled. Conversely, when the identifier is inactive, the symbol is placed in DllImport mode, akin to having an `extern` annotation.

To standardize the use of identifiers, three new version prefixes are introduced into the D specification, with instances for libc, DRuntime, and Phobos provided automatically by the compiler:

The prefixes are ``Have_``, ``InBinary_``, and ``Compiling_``. The suffixes for these three will be a logical package.

1. **Have_ Prefix**: Indicates that a specific logical package is available as a dependency during the linking process.
2. **InBinary_ Prefix**: Indicates that the symbols of a specific logical package are present in the binary currently being compiled.
3. **Compiling_ Prefix**: Indicates that a specific logical package is in the process of being compiled.

These prefixes, coupled with logical package suffixes, enable the handling of any corner case where a symbol needs to be treated as internal instead of external.

Additionally, the D interface generator will be updated to support the insertion of the `InBinary_` version argument. This update is needed to accurately represent C files through a D module. The specific mechanism for determining the suffix is not described here and may rely on C preprocessor capabilities.

#### Positive Notation

The `export` attribute in D is designated for annotating symbols as DllExport. To signify that a symbol is exported, this attribute should be applied directly to the D symbol.

The `export` annotation must not function as a visibility modifier. Treating it as such could inadvertently expose internal implementation details, potentially leading to unsafe operation of a codebase by external entities at the language level.

In any encapsulation unit (such as a struct, class, union, or module), if any member is marked with `export`, all associated generated symbols (like `TypeInfo`, `__initZ`, `opCmp`, etc., but excluding `ModuleInfo`) must also be exported. Failure to export these generated symbols when an associated symbol is exported can lead to linker errors which cannot be resolved without resorting to a linker script.

By default, all symbols are hidden. To explicitly mark a symbol as hidden, use the User-Defined Attribute (UDA) provided in `core.attributes`. This approach is more efficient than having to annotate `export` on every individual symbol you wish to be exported. Instead, it allows you to annotate at the scope level and simply disallow those symbols that are not intended to be exported.

#### Negative Notation

The visibility override switch, when set, causes all symbols to be exported by default.

To override this default setting and explicitly designate a symbol as hidden, one should utilize the UDA provided in `core.attributes`.

Until the DRuntime and Phobos libraries are comprehensively annotated with `export` in an appropriate manner and thoroughly tested, they will rely on this method of symbol visibility management.

### Inlining

Consider an out of binary module:

```d
pragma(inline, true)
export extern void inlineable() {
  noInline;
}

@hidden void noInline();
```

In this example, the `noInline` function is marked as hidden and is therefore not accessible to `inlineable`. If `inlineable` were to be inlined across binary boundaries, this would lead to a linker error due to the unavailability of `noInline`.

To prevent such errors, the compiler must be instructed not to inline functions from an out-of-binary module when these functions reference non-exported symbols.

### Use Cases

This section presents scenarios that illustrate the practical impact and application of the modifications proposed in this DIP. The first case is relevant for users requiring meticulous control over the exportation of symbols. The second focuses on the ease of integrating DRuntime into a binary without the need for adjustments concerning the DllImport status of symbols.

#### Positive Annotation

This use case outlines the process of positively annotating with `export` and optionally employing the `.di` generator. It's presented using Windows file naming conventions.

Directory layout:

```
dependency/source/library.d
dependency/imports/library.di
dependency/library.dll
dependency/library.lib
dependency/library.exp

executable/source/app.d
executable/app.exe
executable/library.dll
```

Source of ``dependency/source/library.d``:

```d
module library;

export void myLibraryFunction() {
    import std.stdio;
    writeln("Hello from my libraries function!");
}
```

Generated ``dependency/source/library.di``:

```d
module library;

export void myLibraryFunction();
```

Source of ``executable/source/app.d``:

```d
module app;

void main() {
    import library;
    myLibraryFunction();
}
```

Using shared libraries:

```sh
dmd -of=dependency/library.dll -shared -Hd=dependency/imports dependency/source/library.d
cp dependency/library.dll executable/library.dll

dmd -of=executable/app.exe -extI=dependency/imports executable/source/app.d dependency/library.lib
```

Using static libraries:

```sh
dmd -of=dependency/library.lib -Hd=dependency/imports dependency/source/library.d

dmd -of=executable/app.exe -I=dependency/imports executable/source/app.d dependency/library.lib
```

The primary difference between using shared and static libraries lies in the inclusion of `-shared` when compiling the former, and the substitution of `-extI` with `-I` when linking the latter.

#### DRuntime in Binary

This use case focuses on the process of integrating DRuntime into a binary. This scenario does not consider other libraries like Phobos and is only an illustrative example, as the switch for choosing between static or shared DRuntime is compiler-specific.

For this use case, we consider what happens to place DRuntime into our resulting binary.
Other libraries such as Phobos are not considered and the switch to pick if Druntime is static or shared is compiler-specific, it is therefore only a demonstration of what it could look like. 

Directory layout:

```
dependency/source/dependency.d
dependency/dependency.lib

mydll/source/api.d
mydll/mydll.dll
mydll/mydll.lib
mydll/mydll.exp
```

Source of ``dependency/source/dependency.d``:

```d
module dependency;

void myLibraryFunction() {
    foreach(m; ModuleInfo) {
        // any symbols that are non-templated will work for this example!
    }
}
```

Source of ``mydll/source/api.d``:

```d
module api;

export void api() {
    import dependency;
    myLibraryFunction();
}
```

Commands for compilation:

```sh
dmd -of=dependency/dependency.lib -lib -lib-druntime=static dependency/source/dependency.d
dmd -of=mydll/mydll.dll -shared -I=dependency/source -lib-druntime=static mydll/source/api.d dependency/dependency.lib
```

Of particular interest is the behavior of `-lib-druntime=static`.

In typical D compilation, import paths and static/import libraries are automatically added. With this DIP, specifying a shared DRuntime version replaces the `-I` with `-extI`, static DRuntime library with the import library, and sets the `-dllimport` override to `externalOnly`.

This approach significantly simplifies the distinction between shared and static DRuntime, potentially allowing the compiler configuration file to obscure these differences.

Currently, DRuntime is not annotated with `export`. If it were, the addition of `-dllimport=externalOnly` would become unnecessary, reducing the risk of the linker attempting to access non-exported symbols.

This DIP aims to eliminate linker warnings like [LNK4217](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/error-messages/tool-errors/linker-tools-warning-lnk4217?view=msvc-170), which are common in the current environment when using shared libraries with a shared DRuntime.

## Breaking Changes and Deprecations

With the proposed changes, `export` will no longer signify what can be termed as "super-public" visibility. This shift could affect the visibility and accessibility of symbols in existing code.

To mitigate this potential issue, codebases can be adjusted by adding `public:` to the line preceding the use of `export`. This solution is backward compatible, ensuring that it functions correctly with both current and future compilers. This approach is recommended for those who prefer to retain the traditional behavior of `export`.

All other modifications proposed in this DIP are essentially opt-in via the `extI` compiler switch.

## Reference

1. In C and C++, the selection between [DllExport](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/exporting-from-a-dll-using-declspec-dllexport?view=msvc-170) and [DllImport](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/importing-into-an-application-using-declspec-dllimport?view=msvc-170) is typically managed through attributes swapped by the macro preprocessor. This approach, while functional, can be seen as cumbersome, requiring per-library configuration.
2. Rust [utilizes a link](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/external-blocks.html#the-link-attribute) attribute, which includes the library name and can be adjusted via command-line arguments to switch the default symbol mode during compilation. This DIP introduces the version naming convention `InBinary_` for specifying whether a package is inside or outside of the binary. This aligns with the existing `Have_` convention used by dub and leverages existing mechanics in D.
3. Ada (GNAT) supports [DllExport](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc-13.2.0/gnat_rm/Pragma-Export_005fFunction.html) through the use of pragmas to explicitly declare exported symbols, with different pragmas for various types. A similar approach is used for [DllImport](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc-13.2.0/gnat_rm/Pragma-Import_005fFunction.html). However, Ada does not provide an intrinsic mechanism for Ada-only libraries to determine the appropriate pragma. While [the creation of bindings](https://docs.adacore.com/gnat_ugn-docs/html/gnat_ugn/gnat_ugn/platform_specific_information.html#using-dlls-with-gnat) in Ada is relatively complex, these seem mostly automatable at the build tool level for Ada projects.

# Glossary

Binary: An executable or shared library.

Object file: An intermediary file that contains compiled code that will be later used by a linker to produce a binary.

Out of binary: A symbol that is not located in the currently compiling binary. If set in DllExport mode and accessed via DllImport, it may be accessed by the currently compiling binary at runtime.

## Copyright & License
Copyright (c) 2024 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

## History
This [DIP was submitted to the DIP Development Forum](https://forum.dlang.org/post/fikldqqeedfuasdutuda@forum.dlang.org) on February 29, 2024. The author was permitted to bypass the DIP Ideas forum on the basis that he had already discussed the concept with one of the language maintainers on GitHub while drafting the proposal.

At the author's request, the DIP manager submitted a final draft of the DIP to the language maintainers on April 10, 2024.

The language maintainers had several questions regarding the necessity of the proposed feature. After a meeting that involved the DIP author, the language maintainers, and other knowlegeable parties, an agreement was reached that some fundamental work was needed on DMD's support for DLLs before a final decision on this proposal could be rendered.
